Understanding the Dynamics of Decision-Making and Choice:
A Scoping Study of Key Psychological Theories to Inform
The Design and Analysis of the Panel Study

Bryony Beresford and Tricia Sloper
DHP 2215 January 2008

© Social Policy Research Unit, University of York 2008

All rights reserved. Reproduction of this report by photocopying or electronic means for noncommercial purposes is permitted. Otherwise, no part of this report may be reproduced,
adapted, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, or otherwise without prior written permission of the Social Policy Research
Unit, University of York.

ISBN 978-1-871713-24-4
A CIP catalogue record for this report is available from the British Library.

Further copies of this report or any other Social Policy Research Unit publication can be
freely obtained by visiting our website:
www.york.ac.uk/spru
Paper copies can be obtained from:
The Publications Office
Social Policy Research Unit
University of York
Heslington
York
YO10 5DD

Understanding the Dynamics of Decision-making and
Choice: A scoping study of key psychosocial theories to
inform the design and analysis of the Panel Study
Abstract
At the heart of SPRU’s DH-funded programme of research is a qualitative
longitudinal Panel Study that aims to examine the choices that older people, disabled
young people, disabled adults and their carers make about their services and
support; how these choices change over time; and the implications for their
experience of independence.
To inform the Panel Study and drawing mainly on psychological research, we
conducted a review of the main theoretical models of decision-making and choice.
Unlike systematic reviews, the review did not set out to identify and evaluate the
existing evidence base. Instead the review identifies the main areas of psychological
theory and research relevant to choices about welfare services; and assesses the
implications of these for the design and analysis of the Panel Study.
The review covers the main theories of judgement, decision-making and choice; the
factors such as emotion, which affect choice and decision-making; and evidence on
specific decision-making situations, including joint decision-making with another
person, making choices on behalf of someone else and decision-making within close
relationships.

CONTENTS
Section 1

Introduction
The process of choice

1
2

Section 2

Theories of Judgement, Decision-making and Choice
The information processing approach to decisions
research
The adaptive Decision-Maker Framework
Use of different choice strategies
The role of emotion and other goals in the
choice-making process
The dual process views of thinking
The usefulness of the decision-maker framework for
the panel study
Other heuristic models
Making decisions involving risk or uncertainty: prospect
theory
Risk and uncertainty
Prospect theory
How risky are we?
Framing
Further loss aversion effects
How people structure decisions
Implications for the panel study
Decision-making: the relationships between attitudes
and behaviour
Theory of Reasoned Action
Theory of Planned Behaviour
Relevance to panel study

3

Section 3

Factors which Affect Choice or Decision-making
Emotion and choice
The role of affect in decision-making
Emotion-specific influences on decision-making
The role of anticipated emotion
Decision generated emotion
Emotion in temporally extended choice
Individual differences in emotionality and effects on
decision-making
Implications for the panel study

i

3
4
7
7
9
11
12
14
15
15
15
16
18
19
19
20
20
20
21

25
25
26
27
29
30
31
32
32

Individual differences and choice/decision-making
Personality and choice/decision-making
Choice and cognitive capacity
Implications for the panel study

Section 4

Appendix

33
33
34
37

Specific Decision-making Situations
Making decisions on behalf of someone else
Capacity and the law
Research on surrogate decision-making
Research on parent decision-making
Implications for the panel study
Shared decision-making
Shared decision-making: advice seeking
Implications for the panel study
Decision-making within close relationships
The relevance of research on group decisionMaking
Dyadic decision-making: the relationship factor
Decision-making between intimate couples
Implications for the panel study

39
39
39
41
43
46
47
47
49
50

Identifying the Literature

55

References

50
50
51
54

57

ii

Understanding the Dynamics of Decision-making and
Choice: A scoping study of key psychosocial theories to
inform the design and analysis of the Panel Study
Section 1:

Introduction

This paper provides an overview of some of the main psychological models of
decision-making and choice and assesses their relevance to disabled and
chronically ill young people and adults, older people and carers, and to the choices
they make about social care and related support services. It addresses three
questions:
•
What are the processes by which people make choices, and what constraints
shape these processes?
•
What are the personal and environmental preconditions for exercising choice
and how do these conditions affect choice?
•
How far are these insights relevant to choices about social care and related
support services on the part of people with impairments or disabilities and their
carers?
The purpose of conducting this review was to inform aspects of research design and
the analysis of data collected during the DH funded Panel Study on ‘Choice and
Change Across the Lifecourse’.
The paper is divided into three sections:
•
Descriptions of key theoretical models (Section 2);
•
Discussion of factors which affect choice or decision-making: emotion,
personality, and cognitive capacity (Section 3);
•
An examination of what is understood about some specific decision-making
situations: making decisions on behalf of someone else; shared decisionmaking; and decision-making in close relationships (Section 4).
A number of theoretical approaches were explored with regard to their potential
usefulness to the panel study (details of the methods are contained in the Appendix).
From that preliminary exploration, three theoretical models will be examined in
Section 2, all of which are concerned with choice or decision-making situations which
are pertinent to the panel study and the above questions:
•
The Information-Processing Approach, in which we focus mainly on the
Adaptive Decision Maker Framework which is concerned with how people
choose between alternatives when none is clearly the ‘best option’. In this
section we also report other bodies of research on the heuristics or strategies

1

•
•

we use to make decisions; and describe what is understood about the role of
unconscious thought processes in decision-making.
Prospect Theory, which is concerned with making decisions involving risk or
uncertainty.
Theory of Reasoned Action and Theory of Planned Behaviour, which are both
concerned with the relationship between attitudes and behaviours in the context
of making choices.

The process of choice
Choice is the outcome of a process which involves assessment and judgement; that
is, the evaluation of different options and making a decision about which option to
choose. In order for these processes to take place and a choice to be made, there
need to be two or more alternatives from which to choose. In addition, these
alternatives should have some positive value; in this sense a 'choice' between
something which is definitely desired and something which is definitely not desired is
not a true choice. The processes entailed in choice all involve cognition, and
psychological theories concentrate on explaining how people make choices, in
particular the cognitive processes that underlie choice. Empirical research on how
people make decisions and choices covers a range of different people in different
situations, for example from clinicians treating patients or investors and financial
experts, to students taking part in psychological experiments. However, it suggests
that different people in different situations frequently think about decisions in the
same way, reflecting the fact that human beings have a common set of cognitive
skills (Hastie and Dawes, 2001). These cognitive skills and their limitations are also
influential in constraining choices so that choice making in reality varies from what
may be seen as ideal and logical.

2

Section 2:

Theories of Judgement, Decision-making
and Choice

Theories regarding judgement, decision making and choice generally fall into two
categories: normative theories of cognition and descriptive theories of cognition.
Normative theories are concerned with 'how we should or ought to reason, make
judgements and take decision' (Over, 2004). Theories falling into this category
include formal logic, probability theory, and decision theory. Descriptive theories set
out to describe how people actually think when making decisions and have empirical
evidence to support them. It is this latter set of theories that we are concerned with in
this paper, in order to inform our aim of exploring the processes through which
people make choices.

The Information Processing Approach to decision research (Payne
and Bettman, 2004)
The Information Processing Approach to decision research can be traced back to
Simon (1955) and the notion of bounded rationality, that is, humans are 'bounded' by
constraints in the environment (for example, information costs), and in the mind (for
example, limited memory); these constraints shape people's behaviour. Research
taking this approach initially focused on cognitive aspects of decision-making; more
recently it has expanded to include emotional and ‘ease of justification’ aspects of
decision-making.
The approach is based on the following assumptions:
•
We are highly selective about what information we attend to and how it is used.
•
Acquiring and processing information has cognitive and/or emotional costs.
•
We use simplification mechanisms (heuristics) to select and process
information: lots of different heuristics have been identified.
•
Heuristics are chosen on the basis of the nature of the task problem.
•
Beliefs and preferences are often constructed/generated through the process of
decision-making, as opposed to individuals having known, well-defined
preferences which they bring to a decision-making situation.
The approach is primarily concerned with understanding controllable, conscious
processes1 (System 2 thinking). However, it has recently been acknowledged that
more work is needed to understand the interaction/impact of System 1 thinking on
System 2 thinking in decision-making. Within this approach is the Adaptive Decision
1

Thinking can be conceived as being on a continuum – intuitive, relatively unconscious (System 1)
through to analytic, controllable, conscious (System 2). See page 9 for further details.

3

Maker Framework, which is concerned with choice among alternative courses of
action.
The Adaptive Decision-Maker Framework
The Adaptive Decision-Maker Framework is an example of the Information
Processing Approach to decision-making. It is concerned with how individuals
choose between different courses of action, in particular, in choice situations where
no single alternative (or option) is best on all attributes (or qualities, features). These
sorts of decisions are known as preferential choice problems.
The Adaptive Decision-Maker Framework argues that preferential choice problems
are generally solved through a process of information acquisition and evaluation
about the alternatives and their attributes. The attributes by which the different
options are defined will vary according to:
•
their desirability to the decision-maker;
•
the uncertainty of actually receiving the attribute value;
•
the willingness of the decision-maker to accept a loss on one attribute for gain
on another attribute.
The following example illustrates the role of attributes in the decision-process put
forward by the Adaptive Decision-Maker Framework.

4

Figure 1:

An illustration of the role of attributes in the decision process

An individual is weighing up the merits of various holiday destinations.
The desirability of the attributes to the decision-maker
The following attributes are important to this individual:
• Weather: very warm and sunny
• Culture: unspoilt, not touristy
• Journey time: no more than 10 hours
• Personal safety: holidaying alone, wants to feel safe
• Location: seaside but near mountains.
• Language: native language must be Spanish or English widely spoken.
Other attributes of these destinations (for example, type of local cuisine,
opportunities for shopping) are not important to this individual. In addition, two of
the destinations have ‘unique’ desired attributes not shared with the other options
(one offers the opportunity of visiting a country never visited before, another has
relatives living in the vicinity thus affording the chance to visit them).
The uncertainty of actually receiving the attribute value
Some of the desired attributes are more certain than others. Thus the location and
language of the various destinations can be carefully researched in advance and
the individual can be certain about these. There is less certainty with respect to
other attributes and the level of certainty may vary between alternatives. Thus,
whilst for one destination there is 90% certainty that it will be 750F and will have 8
hours sunshine each day, another destination may be warmer and sunnier but the
weather is less predictable and there is only a 75% chance of temperatures of at
least 800F and 10 hours sunshine per day. Another source of uncertainty in this
situation is that the individual is somewhat dependent on other people’s
judgements as to how ‘touristy’ each destination is.
Willingness to accept loss on one attribute for gain on another
Finally, in making a decision, this individual is prepared to forgo a journey time of
less than 10 hours in order to gain a greater guarantee of personal safety.

Theorists argue that there are ranges of strategies (heuristics) someone might use
for solving a multi-attribute choice problem. The strategy chosen will depend on the
demands of the task (for example, the number of alternatives to be considered), how
accurate the decision has to be, and individual differences. In other words, different
individuals will chose different strategies, and this will also vary according to the
importance of the choice-making situation to that individual (Beach and Mitchell,
1978; Payne, 1976).
Some strategies will use all relevant information, others will use information in a
more limited and often very selective fashion. Some strategies focus on the

5

alternatives and process each one in turn, other strategies are more attributefocused (that is, the values of several alternatives on a single attribute are examined
before information on another attribute is considered).
Simpler decision processes (heuristics) save on cognitive effort by only processing
some of the decision-relevant information. In experimental conditions they have been
shown to work less and less well the greater the number of important attributes.
Researchers have identified and named different types of heuristics.
•
Lexographic strategy (LEX): here the strategy is to identify and chose the
alternative with the best value on the most important attribute.
•
Satisficing Strategy for Decisions (SAT) (Simon, 1955): this heuristic involves
each attribute’s value for the alternative/option currently under consideration
being compared to a pre-determined cut-off level for that attribute. If any
attribute fails to meet the cut-off level, the option is rejected and the next option
considered. Once a satisfactory alternative has been identified, that alternative
is chosen (so it might not be the ‘best’). If no option passes the cut-off, the
levels can be relaxed and the process repeated.
•
Elimination By Aspects (EBA) (Tversky, 1972): this is a commonly used
heuristic containing elements of LEX and SAT. EBA eliminates options that do
not meet a minimum cut-off value for the most important attribute or do not have
a desired aspect for the most important attribute. The elimination process is
repeated for the second most important attribute and continues until a single
option remains. The order in which attributes are considered reflects the
decision-maker’s basic values. Theorists argue that ‘decision accuracy’ is
affected by the attributes used (for example, selectively attending to irrelevant,
or relatively irrelevant, attributes).
Researchers have also shown that decision-makers may combine choice strategies.
A typical combined strategy might involve elimination of some alternatives in an
initial ‘broad brush’ viewing of the options, followed by a second phase in which the
remaining options are analysed in more detail.
Laboratory-based research on the effectiveness/accuracy of heuristics has shown
that heuristics can result in highly accurate/high quality decisions with substantial
savings in cognitive effort. However, no single heuristic does well across all
environments and people therefore need a repertoire of heuristics. Researchers
have also shown that, in cases of substantial time pressure, the simple LEX rule is
often best in terms of maintaining decision accuracy. That is, it is best to examine
some, albeit limited, information about each option under severe time pressure than
to examine some options in depth and not examine others at all.

6

Use of different choice strategies
There has been a lot of research looking at how we use or choose different choice
strategies. Key (relevant) findings from this work are as follows:
•
People process information quite differently if faced with many alternatives (four
or more) than if faced with just two or three alternatives.
•

People have a repertoire of decision strategies and sometimes plan in advance
how to solve a problem (based on the evidence of what the task involves).
However, sometimes strategy selection is bottom-up, with little or no
constructive awareness of a strategy being selected.

•

Furthermore, people adjust their processing during the course of solving a
problem in an “opportunistic” fashion as they learn more about the structure of
the decision.

•

Decision strategies with high cognitive effort are more likely to be used when
decision accuracy is prioritised over saving cognitive effort.

•

In laboratory-based simulations, people who shift strategies in response to the
demands of the decision or time constraints perform better.

•

Time pressure (that is, a decision must be made by a certain point in time) has
been shown to be one of the most important decision task variables. Errors in
judgement can be made from either deciding too soon (rush-to-judgement) or
from delaying decisions too long.

•

Individual differences in values will define what constitutes an accurate or high
quality decision (that is, whether or not an individual is happy/satisfied with the
decision made). It is also likely that we adjust our ‘quality standards’ as a
function of task demands (such as time pressure, complexity of the decision).

The role of emotion and other goals in the choice-making process
The majority of research and theorising on decision-making has very much been
approached in terms of understanding decision-quality (or accuracy) and minimising
cognitive effort. More recently, the Adaptive Decision-Maker Framework has been
extended to include emotion and other goals for a decision because it is clear that
strategy selection and other aspects of decision behaviour are not just determined by
cognitive effort and decision accuracy. The other goals (or desired outcomes of a
decision) are often developed constructively ‘on the spot’ and can affect the
processes of the decision and the products of the decision.

7

The Choice Goals Framework for Decision-making
Bettman et al. (1998) developed a choice goals framework for decision-making. In
addition to maximising decision quality and minimizing cognitive effort, they argued
there were two further meta-goals for choice namely:
•
Minimizing the experience of negative emotion while making the decision and
afterwards;
•
Maximising the ease of justification of a decision to oneself and to others.
The relative importance of these meta-goals, and other goals, will vary according to
the specific choice-making situation. It would appear that factors such as the
importance and irreversibility of the decision affect the way these meta-goals are
prioritised. Minimising negative emotion and ease of justification are clearly
potentially salient issues for the Panel Study. In terms of the latter, Bettman et al.,
1998 argues that needing to justify a decision may lead to the use of decision
strategies which are based on easily seen and communicable relationships among
options (relational heuristics). Work on the impact of minimising negative emotion
within the decision-making process is more developed and draws on other preexisting theories and research on how negative emotion impacts on cognitive
processing and how humans cope with negative emotion. These are described
below.
Minimising negative emotion
Not all decisions evoke emotional responses, but sometimes people face emotionladen choices.
There are contrasting views on the potential impact of negative emotion on the
decision-making process:
•
Hancock and Warm (1989) argue that emotion interferes with decision
processes and degrades cognitive performance (observable in increased time
to make a decision and more negative error). This argument would suggest that
decision situations where negative emotions are aroused are, in a sense,
analogous to highly complex decision situations. One would therefore expect
individuals to adapt to them in the same way as they adapt to complex decision
situations, that is by shifting to simpler, easier to implement decision strategies
(Payne and Bettman, 2004).
•
An alternative view draws on coping theory, which argues that people directly
adapt to the negative emotion in one of two ways (Folkman and Lazarus, 1988):
a. Problem-focused coping. Adopting this strategy will mean the person tries
to solve the problem as well as possible, with the negative emotion being
seen to indicate the importance of the decision to the individual.
b.

Emotion-focused coping. This way of managing negative emotion will
mean action is taken directly to minimise emotion by changing the amount
or content of thought about the decision. This could be achieved in a
8

variety of ways: refusing to make any decision (Anderson, 2003); letting
another person make the decision for you; showing an increased
preference for the status quo option or any other related option that is
easier to justify to oneself (Luce, 1998); not avoiding the decision
altogether but instead avoiding whatever aspects of the decision one finds
most distressing.
One type of decision which has the potential to arouse negative emotions are when
trade-offs have to be made between two highly valued things. An example of an
emotionally difficult trade-off is life sustaining, but invasive and possibly painful,
treatment versus quality of life. Tetlock (2002) talked about sacred versus profane
tradeoffs and noted that some tradeoffs are taboo – people just do not go there.
Because making trade-offs can generate negative emotions, individuals may cope
with emotion-laden decisions by avoiding strategies which use trade-offs (of one
attribute against another) and instead use non-compensatory strategies.
The negative emotions experienced while making a choice involving difficult tradeoffs have been shown to impact on strategy selection and decision-making. For
example, research has found that emotion-laden choices are characterised by
increased amounts of processing and avoidance of trade-offs. In addition, evidence
suggests that decision-makers tend to confront between-attribute trade-offs explicitly
when attributes are relatively low in emotional trade-off difficulty, but they avoid these
explicit trade-offs when attributes are higher in emotional trade-off difficulty.
The role of emotion in making choices will be further discussed in Section 3.
The dual process views of thinking
The dual process views of thinking are another extension of the information
processing perspective. A number of researchers have argued that there are two
modes of thinking (Hogarth, 2001; Kahnemann and Frederick, 2002; Sloman, 1996):
System 1 thinking (intuitive) and System 2 thinking (analytical). Rather than being
distinct, it is thought they probably represent the ends of a continuum (Hammond,
1996). Simon (1983) also argued that any kind of serious, complex thinking employs
both analytical and intuitive thought.
System 1 thinking is relatively unconscious, relatively independent of language and
generates a feeling of certitude. It is related to intuition and allows rapid, automatic
and relatively effortless decision-making (Slovic et al., 2002). In contrast, System 2
thinking is controllable, conscious, constrained by working memory, rule-based,
serial, develops with age and is vulnerable to aging, is related to language and is
less characterised by feelings of certitude. It is commonly called analytic thinking.

9

While System 2 thinking covers the higher level cognitive, attention-demanding,
information processing activities that characterise much decision-making (and which
have been the main focus of research), there is a growing awareness that
information processing below the level of consciousness (that is, System 1 thinking)
may have far greater impact on judgements and choices than previously realized
(Bargh and Chartrand, 1999; Hogarth, 2001).
There are a number of hypotheses about how System 1 and System 2 thinking
interact. The Correction model proposes that an initial judgement is quickly arrived at
via System 1 and that this judgement may then either be expressed immediately, or
confirmed and corrected by more effortful, conscious System 2 processing (for
example, Cobos et al., 2003). Some argue that System 2 thinking is only used to
deal with more unusual cases. Hogarth (2001) argues that a mark of intelligence is
learning when intuition (System 1) is erroneous and how to use deliberate (System 2)
thought appropriately to make correct judgements.
Others have suggested that System 2 thinking is used in situations either where the
individual cannot rely on past experience or with respect to events happening in the
future. In contrast, Gilbert and Gill (2000) argue that the mode of information
processing is selected on the basis of factors such as cognitive load or time pressure;
System 1 thinking is selected when cognitive load is high or time is short.
Research has compared the efficacy of these two ways of thinking in decisionmaking. Dijksterhuis (2004) reports a set of experiments testing two hypotheses:
•
When making complex decisions, a brief period of unconscious thought will lead
to a better decision compared with conditions under which unconscious thought
is prevented.
•
When making complex decisions, conscious thought is inferior relative to
unconscious thought.
The results confirmed the hypotheses, showing that participants in the unconscious
thought condition (performing a distracter task before making the decision) generally
performed better than those in the conscious thought condition (asked to think very
carefully about the information they had been given before making a decision).
Dijksterhuis then proposed that unconscious thought is active: it organises
information in the memory by polarising the alternatives and/or by clustering pieces
of information that relate to the same alternative. Two further experiments tested this
hypothesis and found evidence for both these processes under the unconscious
thought condition, but less evidence under the conscious thought condition. Indeed
conscious thought seemed to prevent almost completely meaningful clustering.
In these experiments, participants were told that they had to decide between various
alternatives before they engaged in conscious or unconscious thought. It may be that
this is crucial to ensuring that unconscious thought is directed at the particular task.
10

These findings have relevance to the conditions under which users and carers make
choices. How much information do they have? Do they try to think through and weigh
up all the information? Is this possible, given limited processing capacity? Do they
come to decisions after stepping back from the information and thinking about
something else? How do circumstances affect decision making (for example, limits
on capacity through stress and emotion or an inability to step back)?
The usefulness of the decision-maker framework for the Panel Study
This is a model which would appear to be highly relevant to the project as it is
concerned with choices between courses of action where none of the options is
optimal in terms of all its attributes. Furthermore, proponents of this approach
suggest it is particularly relevant with respect to unusual situations, where the
individual cannot ‘go’ on past experience, and with regard to decisions re future
events. Finally, there appears to be relatively robust evidence to support the
framework.
•

The approach is primarily concerned with cognitive processes and raises
questions about the impact of learning difficulties/cognitive impairment/memory
impairment and ability/quality/accuracy of decision-making. This will be an issue
for the Panel Study in situations where there is a decline or loss of cognitive
abilities: how do individuals involved in those situations try to support continued
involvement in decision-making (for example, by changing the amount and way
information is provided); how are judgements made about someone’s ability to
take decisions; whether certain decisions are judged too complicated etc.

•

The recent shift to considering issues of negative emotion and ‘ease of
justification’ on the process and outcomes of decision-making suggests the
importance of exploring those issues with Panel Study participants. For
example, do people avoid certain pieces of information in making a decision
because they are too emotionally difficult? To what extent does the notion of
‘ease of justification’ impact on the decision process, bearing in mind that many
of the decisions we will be exploring are relatively ‘public’ (if not in the decision
process itself, then in terms of the outcome of a decision)? It is important that
we explore these other meta-goals in the interviews.

•

Another interesting research finding is that which suggests people’s
preferences for/beliefs about things are often constructed (not merely revealed)
in the course of decision-making. Perhaps this is particularly relevant where
entirely novel situations are being encountered (for example, through sudden
onset or degenerative conditions). It would also be good to explore the way
decision-making means that the beliefs/views which people hold in quite an

11

objective sense might be challenged and changed during a decision-making
episode.
•

The emphasis on information raises issues about access to information, the
way information is provided and how that may skew a decision. The
phenomenon of ‘framing’ (a key aspect of Prospect Theory that we discuss later
in this paper) links nicely to this.

•

Finally, the decision-maker framework acknowledges numerous sources of
individual difference to account for differences in the way individuals make a
decision and in the decision made (for example, cognitive ability; choice of
heuristics; preferred styles of coping with negative emotion; social context in
which having to justify oneself).

Other heuristic models
The purpose of a heuristic model is to describe the actual process of decision
making; observational and empirical evidence on how people make decisions
underlies these models. The models specify a process rule; the capacities the rule
exploits to be simple; and the kinds of problems the heuristic can solve. Common
models are recognition heuristics, heuristics based on reasons, and social heuristics.
The basis of heuristics is that we don't know the optimal solution to problems but can
use heuristics (or mental short cuts) to find good enough solutions. Gigerenzer (2004)
states that heuristics are:
•
Simple relative to human capacities, allow fast and frugal judgements, can be
easily understood and taught to a novice and can be generalised to new
situations.
•
To some degree specific to particular environments and types of problems.
The recognition heuristic
This heuristic builds on the human capacity for recognition, for example of faces,
voices, names. It shows that when trying to judge between options, where one option
is recognised and another is not, people will infer that the recognised option has the
higher value. For example, American and German students were asked which city
had the bigger population - San Diego or San Antonio (Goldstein and Gigerenzer,
2002). 100 per cent of German students answered correctly (San Diego – they
chose the city whose name they recognised). Only two-thirds of Americans
answered correctly – they had heard of both cities so had too much information.
Similar results have been found for judgements about the excellence of colleges and
sports teams. This heuristic is successful when recognition is strongly related to the
criteria on which the choice is being made, and in these circumstances the 'less is

12

more' effect applies – that is, more knowledgeable groups make worse inferences
than less knowledgeable groups.
The social heuristic
The social heuristic uses human capacities for social learning and imitation. In brief,
this heuristic is based on choosing what the majority of one's peers are choosing (for
example, thinking of getting married when most others in one’s social group do).
Emotional processes can also be key building blocks of social heuristics, the prime
example being falling in love as a stopping rule in the search for a partner.
Heuristics based on reasons
Another set of heuristics comes into operation when recognition is not a valid
response or when people know too much to take such short cuts. People then
search for cues or reasons for action. However often they do not go systematically
through all cues and add and weight them. Rather, short cuts are taken to reach a
decision based on one-reason decision-making ('Take the Best'), or adding up cues
until a threshold is reached (the 'tallying heuristic'). Each of these strategies
comprises i) a search rule; ii) a rule for stopping; and iii) decision-making.
For Take the Best the process involves: i) look up cues with the highest validity first;
ii) if one object has a positive cue value and the other does not then stop the search.
If not, exclude this cue and continue to search on the next most valid cue; iii) predict
that the object with the positive cue value has a higher value on the criterion and
therefore choose this option.
For the ‘tallying heuristic’ the strategy is: i) search through cues in random order and
look up values for each cue, either all cues or a predefined number; ii) then stop the
search and determine which cue has most positive values; iii) predict that the object
with the highest number of positive cue values has the higher value on the criterion
and therefore choose this option.
There are a considerable number of empirical studies that have looked at use of
Take the Best, but there is comparatively little empirical work on tallying. One-reason
(‘Take the Best’) decision-making has been observed in magistrates making bail
decisions on the basis of one reason (Dhami, 2003); GPs prescribing lipid-lowering
drugs (Dhami and Harries, 2001); and parents deciding which doctor to take their
child to (Scott, 2002). However, this type of decision-making is not used by all
participants in these studies. In a series of experimental studies, Newell and Shanks
(2003) and Newell et al. (2003) found that only around 60 per cent of subjects
adopted heuristics strategies, with around a third conforming to all three TTB rules.
However, taking each rule separately, between 75 and 92 per cent of subjects
adhered to TTB search, stop or decision rules. Newell et al., found no effect of

13

complexity of task on whether or not TTB rules were used and suggest that
personality factors may influence strategies used.
Implications of heuristics for understanding decision-making
The implications to be drawn from heuristic models are that more information and
more choice is not always better. There is considerable empirical evidence on this
(for example, Schwartz, 2004); experts usually base their judgements on a few
pieces of information (Shanteau, 1992), and shoppers buy more when there are
fewer varieties (Iyengar and Lepper, 2000).
A concept which can be seen to be related to use of heuristics is that of 'satisficing'
as opposed to 'maximizing' (Simon 1957, 1982). Satisficing refers to satisfying
ourselves while falling short of maximizing goal satisfaction. Heuristics are satisficing
procedures for making inferences and decisions. Interestingly, satisficers have been
found to be more optimistic and have higher life satisfaction than maximizers, who
are more depressed and show more regret and self-blame (Schwartz et al., 2002).
Relevance of heuristics to Panel Study
Heuristics have been used to make decision trees, for instance in clinical decisionmaking (Green and Mehr, 1997; Fischer et al., 2002). We might want to think about
producing decision trees from analysis of the study data. In relation to choices about
support services, the ideas put forward in fast and frugal heuristics can provide a
basis for exploring the processes by which service users and carers make choices.
What are the important cues they use? How much information do they have? How
much information do they actually use in making the decision? What sort of
information assumes greatest importance? In what circumstances do people use
more or less information? What happens if the cues used by user and carer or by
users and professionals are different?

Making decisions involving risk or uncertainty: prospect theory
Most decisions involve risk and there is a substantial body of work on risky decisionmaking dating back to the 1920’s. This has been inter-disciplinary, with economics
and psychology as the key players. Other disciplines (business, law, medicine,
political science and public policy) have applied the principles and models
developed. As with other areas of decision-making research, two key questions
have been addressed:
•
How should individuals behave when faced with a risky choice (normative)?
•
How do individuals behave when faced with a risky choice (descriptive)?
A further approach (prescriptive) is more recent and is concerned with how to get
people to act more normatively. This area of work is called decision-analysis.

14

Risk and uncertainty
Within scholarly work, a clear distinction has been made between risk and
uncertainty (Knight, 1921). Risky decisions are those decisions where the
probabilities of the various possible outcomes are objective or known (for example,
gambling on the flip of a coin, a roulette wheel). Uncertainty occurs where the
decision-maker has to estimate or infer the probabilities of the various outcomes
happening (for example, placing a bet on a racehorse or the chances of the weather
being sunny for a barbecue at the weekend). Most of the important decisions we
make involve uncertainty rather than risk. Our understanding of decisions involving
uncertainty is much less advanced than our understanding of risky decision-making.
However, it is argued that models of risky decision-making can be extended to
decision-making involving uncertainty and there is a sizeable body of research to
support this argument (Wu et al., 2004).
Prospect theory
In 1979, two economists (Kahnemann and Tversky) published a paper ‘Prospect
Theory: an analysis of decision under risk’. This paper identified the inadequacies of
previous descriptive models of risky decision-making (notably Expected Utility
Theory (Friedmann and Savage, 1948; von Neumann and Morgenstern, 1947) and
Subjective Expected Utility (Savage, 1954)). Prospect theory is acknowledged to be
the best descriptive model of risky decision-making. Since 1979, Prospect Theory
has been developed and modified, with two parallel streams of work going on:
economists have been striving to refine the mathematics of the model, while
psychologists have been more interested in exploring the underlying psychological
processes (for example, cognitive processes, personality and motivational factors).
This work (primarily the economic aspects) has resulted in an evolved form of the
model known as Cumulative Prospect Theory (Tversky and Kahnemann, 1992). An
important aspect of its development has been to incorporate decision-making
involving uncertainty.
In essence, Prospect Theory is a mathematical model which predicts or explains
decision-making. Fortunately it is not necessary to explain the mathematics in order
to identify some key principles which are important to our understanding of decisionmaking in situations of uncertainty. These principles will now be described.
How risky are we?
Before Prospect Theory it was assumed that people are risk averse – that is, they
will always choose the least risky option. However, it is not as simple as that. In fact,
we are both risk seeking and risk averse. The way in which the options (or attributes
of options) under consideration are perceived (or presented) in terms of whether they
are gains or losses is the primary influence on whether, in a particular situation, we
15

are risk seeking or risk averse. Key research findings with respect to risk-seeking
and risk aversion are as follows:
•
Losses ‘loom larger’ than corresponding gains. For example, for equal stakes,
most people often won’t bet on a coin toss.
•
People will take greater risks to avoid loss than they will to achieve a gain.
•
Gains and losses are not (necessarily) absolute but also include changes to the
existing state. So a loss of £100 is more serious for someone with £200 in their
pocket compared to £1000 in their pocket.
•
People are averse to sacrificing a certainty for the chance of getting a slightly
better outcome.
•
Loss aversion means that people favour the status quo over other options. A
simple example here is an experiment by Knetsch (1989). In this study students
were randomly given a gift of either a mug or a bar of chocolate and then
allowed to trade. One might have expected a considerable amount of trading
given that the gifts were free and randomly assigned. However, around 90 per
cent of students chose not to trade and kept the gift they were given.
•
People will pay a large premium to avoid the small chance of receiving nothing
(for example, insurance).
•
Options (or the attributes of options) are evaluated as losses or gains relative to
a point/points of reference. These points of reference reflect the nature of the
choice to be made. So, a person with a limited income going about choosing a
car might use fuel economy and purchase cost as points of reference. (Other
points of reference might also creep in, such as the ‘look’ of the car, and
personal views about a particular type, for example, petrol versus diesel).
•
Points of reference which are relevant to a decision are based on individual
beliefs and values which are salient/relevant to the particular decision. So,
going back to the car example, environment-friendly credentials might be the
key reference point for one person while ‘pose value’ will be the key reference
point for another.
•
It is possible to manipulate the way information relevant to a decision is valued
or perceived. A simple example is provided by Levin’s work on people’s choices
of food. Levin (1987) showed that people change in the way they perceive a
food according to whether the fat content is described in positive (for example,
90 per cent fat free) or negative (for example, 10 per cent fat) terms.
Framing
A key finding from (or aspect of) the Prospect Theory approach is that, when faced
with a decision problem, people form a mental representation of that problem (Figure
2).

16

Figure 2:

The role of mental representation in judgment and decisionmaking

Context

Decision
problem

Information
about the
problem

Mental
representation
of a problem

Judgement

Decision/
choice

Individual
differences

(adapted from: Soman, 2004, p 380)
The mental model (or framing) of a problem includes both information about the
decision problem and the context of the decision problem (for example, time
constraints, emotional aspects etc.). Individual differences in the way information is
perceived, organised and interpreted, and differences in context, mean that the
decision or choice made about the same decision problem will vary between
individuals and across different contexts (Kahnemann and Tversky, 1984;
Shoemaker and Russo, 2001). As Soman (2005) points out:
The implication of a personal and situation specific mental model is that
two individuals who might be presented with the same problem stimulus
might actually be solving different ‘mental’ problems.
(p380: our emphasis)
Framing is a subconscious activity but can be manipulated deliberately by the
individual making the decision or by other individuals, as has been extensively
demonstrated in laboratory experiments (Kahnemann and Tversky, 1979; Tversky
and Kahnemann, 1981). For example, researchers have shown that manipulation of
the way outcomes are described (in terms of loss or gain) results in completely
different decisions being made. What is also interesting is that in these experiments
subjects did not try to reframe the information given to them. Even the researchers
conducting these experiments found the strength of the ‘framing effect’ striking: ‘We
were surprised by how easy it was to construct different versions of a decision
problem that were transparently equivalent when considered together but evoked
different preferences when considered separately’ (Kahnemann, 2000). The notion

17

that the way that decision-related information is perceived and processed is critical to
decision-making points us to the information processing models of decision-making
described above.
Further loss aversion effects
There are other ways in which our aversion to loss has been shown to affect
decision-making. These include:
The sunk-cost effect
It has been shown that the greater the price paid for a product, the more likely
people are to use or consume it, even in the face of risk or adversity (Arkes and
Blumer, 1985). Thaler (1980) gives the following example: ‘A man joins a tennis club
and pays $300 yearly membership fee. After two weeks of playing he develops a
tennis elbow. He continues to play (in pain) saying ‘I don’t want to waste the $300!’’.
Here the loss of a past investment drives the decision to continue to play despite
considerable pain.
Advantages and disadvantages in choice
Researchers have shown that the extent of difference between two options will be
viewed as greater if framed as a difference between two disadvantages, compared
to a difference between two advantages. Thus the way information about options or
attributes of options (as advantages versus disadvantages, or losses versus gains
with respect to a reference point) is presented will affect the decision made.
A reluctance to choose
This is observed in situations where someone is having to make a choice between
two options. One of these options is better with respect to one attribute while the
other option is better with respect to another attribute. As long as the person is still in
the process of making the choice, they have not experienced a loss in terms of either
attribute. Once an option is chosen, the person then experiences a loss. At this
stage, the rejected option might start feeling more valuable and lead to regret about
the decision made (Carmon, Wertenbroch and Zeelenberg, 2003). For example, for
someone choosing a home two key attributes might be the number of bedrooms and
being on a quiet street. One house (Option A) under consideration has 4 bedrooms
but is on a street which is noisy during the rush hour periods, the other (Option B)
only has 3 bedrooms but is quietly situated. By choosing Option A the person feels
they have lost living on a quiet street and this might then become a more important
attribute than the number of bedrooms and they then regret the decision to buy
Option A.

18

How people structure decisions
Prospect theorists argue that people can both consider (and compare) all options at
once or consider options sequentially (for example, Read et al., 1999). This
phenomenon appears similar to the different types of heuristics described in the
information processing approach above.
Implications for the Panel Study
One of the key implications of Prospect Theory for the panel study is that it is
possible (intentionally and unintentionally) to externally manipulate a person’s
decision by the way a decision problem is presented and associated information
provided. This could happen in situations where a professional is presenting
options/choices and also within close relationships (mother/child; partner/partner),
where one of the individuals in the relationship holds more information relevant to the
choice. It is important we explore and identify this as there are clear policy/practice
implications.
In situations of joint-decision making, Prospect Theory argues that the same
decision-problem might be being framed differently by the two people involved, either
because they hold different values/attitudes or because the outcome will have
different impacts on the two individuals involved (for example, a decision about
moving an older person into residential care could be framed by the person to be
moved as loss of independence, but by their partner as removal of a significant care
burden or a way of improving the quality of care received). This would suggest that it
is important for the Panel Study to ascertain people’s representations of the
decisions they are making (an ostensibly identical decision may well be framed
differently by different people), and also to explore the information they are
presented with.
In addition, framing effects might be an important phenomenon to explore in
situations where people change their minds or choices have to be revisited due to
changing circumstances; the choice problem may have been reframed, or
values/attitudes revised as a result of changes in the condition or other
circumstances.
Finally, Prospect Theory also provides a framework by which we can understand the
seemingly ‘irrational’ decisions being made by participants.

19

Decision-making: the relationships between attitudes and
behaviour
Theory of Reasoned Action
The Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA) (Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980) is particularly
influential in the field of decision-making regarding health-related behaviour. It builds
on theories regarding relationships between attitudes and behaviour. Its basic
assumption is that in most cases individuals can choose whether or not to perform a
behaviour. TRA states that the primary determinant of behaviour is the person’s
intention – given the appropriate opportunity to perform a behaviour, intentions will
guide behaviour. Ajzen and Fishbein propose that intentions are derived from two
cognitive processes: the person’s attitude towards the behaviour and his/her
perceived social norms regarding the behaviour – termed ‘subjective norm’.
Attitude is assumed to be determined by the person’s belief about, and evaluation of,
the outcomes of an action. TRA recognises that behaviour occurs in the context of
social influences which exert pressure to perform or not perform a particular
behaviour. A further influence on intention is the subjective norm, which is a
combination of the person’s belief that people who are important to him/her think that
s/he should or should not perform the behaviour, and the person’s motivation to
comply with these opinions.
Theory of Planned Behaviour
TRA originally assumed that most behaviours of interest are those where the person
has the resources, skills and opportunities to engage in their desired action.
However, recognising that this is often not the case, Ajzen (1988) proposed an
extension of TRA – the Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB). This added a further
dimension to TRA – that of perceived control over the intended behaviour. Perceived
behavioural control is influenced by internal factors (skills, ability, information,
emotions) and external factors (opportunity to engage in the behaviour and the
extent to which performing the behaviour depends on the cooperation of others). A
person’s perceived behavioural control reflects his/her beliefs about factors that may
inhibit or promote the performance of the behaviour. Perceived behavioural control is
posited to have a causal influence on intentions, but actual behavioural control also
has a direct influence on behaviour (see Figure 3 below).
Meta-analyses of studies applying TPB conclude that it accounts for considerable
proportions of the variance in intentions across a range of behaviours (39-41 per
cent) and a somewhat lower proportion of variance in behaviour (27-34 per cent)
(Armitage and Connor, 2001; Godin and Kok, 1996 – cited in de Wit and Stroebe,
2004). TRA and TPB have been applied to a wide range of decisions about

20

behaviours (for example, dealing in stocks and shares, smoking initiation, shoplifting,
condom use, oral contraception, participation in exercise).
Relevance to Panel Study
The components of these theories (TRA and TPB) have a number of implications for
how we look at choice and decision making. The concept of subjective norm can be
seen to have relevance to many instances of decision making where the attitudes of
key people, such as relatives and professionals, and the importance users and
carers attach to these, are likely to influence decisions. For instance, one study
found that parents felt under pressure from family and/or health professionals to
make a particular decision about gastrostomy for their child (Guerriere et al., 2003).
It will be important to explore in interviews who are the people who are important in
any decision, what their attitudes towards the decision are or were and what weight
users/carers placed on this. Similarly, we should explore people’s beliefs about, and
evaluations of, the outcomes of a chosen action and how these influence the choice
made.
Research on adaptation in families with disabled or chronically ill children points to
the importance of family values and beliefs in adaptation and resilience (for example,
Summers et al., 1989). There is also evidence that having a disabled child can spur
parents to examine their own beliefs and their assumptions about their social
environment. In a small qualitative study of parents of children with Down's
syndrome or an autistic spectrum disorder, King et al. (2006) found that parents
became more aware of their beliefs. They felt that it was important to be clear about
their values because these affected their priorities for the child, and thus the
supports and opportunities they provided and sought for the child and the goals they
worked towards. As this quote from a parent illustrates, these values play a key role
in seeking and making choices:
I think that, as a family with a child who has a disability, we have to be
very clear on priorities because often we have to present those
priorities . . . to professionals, to teachers, but sometimes even to family
members and neighbours because we are often challenged on what those
priorities are. . . . Often people don’t accept the fact that we know best, so
we have to be very clear about those priorities and, even though they
change at times, we have to make those decisions. And if we don’t make
those decisions, we don’t have clear choices for our children, for our
families. Then we are just sort of nudged into what is out there and the
world is taking control really. If we don’t put our priorities straight then we
don’t get real choices.
(King et al., 2006. p.359)

21

Figure 3:

The theories of Reasoned Action and Planned Behaviour

Belief about
outcomes

x

Evaluation
of outcomes

Attitudes towards
behaviour

Normative
beliefs

x

Motivation
to comply

Subjective norm

x

Perceived
facilitating/
inhibiting power

Perceived control

Perceived
Likelihood of
occurrence

From Bennett and Murphy (1997)

22

Behavioural
intention

Behaviour

The study also suggests that these families may be clearer about their beliefs and
priorities than families with non-disabled children, as they are called on to articulate
them more often to justify decisions. This indicates that it will be important in the
Panel Study to examine individuals' beliefs, values and priorities and how these
affect choice making; how such beliefs may have changed and continue to change
with changes in the adult or young person's condition; and how these changes
impact on choices. In particular, TRA and TPB point to the importance of exploring
the effects when changes in beliefs are in an opposite direction to normative social
influences. Research on families with disabled/chronically ill children points to a
number of ways in which families' re-evaluation of values may result in a devaluing of
some common social values, such as achievement, material values and income (for
example, King et al., 2006; Sloper, 1996).
The issue of perceived control is also clearly important in the decisions users and
carers make. For example, parents’ and young people’s perceptions of their abilities
to deal with the technology of gastrostomies or assisted ventilation will influence their
decision about instituting this technology (Miller et al., 1990).

23

24

Section 3:

Factors Which Affect Choice or DecisionMaking

Emotion and choice
Choice making has both cognitive and emotional components. At a general level,
emotion and cognition are both types of information processing, but they have
different functions. Many theorists see emotion as alerting individuals to important
features of a situation and providing direction for cognitive processes and behaviour
(Lemerise and Arsenio, 2000). In relation to choice, people think about the options
and the likely consequences of choosing an option, but in addition there are strong
emotional factors in play. People have feelings about the decision and expectations
about feelings that might result from choosing different options. (The emotions
actually experienced as a result of the outcome of a choice may or may not concur
with earlier expectations). These emotions help to prioritise between different options
and reduce the amount of information to be processed. It has been argued that
emotions are particularly likely to play a role in conditions of uncertainty and
incomplete knowledge which characterise many decisions, as they reduce
information processing (Lemerise and Arsenio, 2000). Affective reactions are often
the first reactions to stimuli and may then guide processing and judgement; in some
cases individuals may choose things they find attractive and then justify choices with
reasons (Zajonc, 1980). The mechanisms by which emotion informs choice are
known as ‘somatic markers’; for example when a negative outcome becomes linked
with a specific thought or behaviour, a negative ’somatic’ or gut feeling is
experienced which adaptively can protect against future losses and narrow down the
field of alternatives to choose from. This mechanism is usually adaptive, but can
produce bias which is maladaptive (Damasio, 1994).
Evidence for the centrality of emotion in decision making is provided by studies of
people with neurological damage which interferes with the processing of emotional
signals but not basic cognitive functions. Such damage leads to impairments in
decision-making processes (Behara, 2004). An extensive and growing body of
research has examined the effects of emotion, affect and mood on information
processing, judgement and decision-making1. Some studies have focused on
‘integral’ affect, that is feelings experienced about a particular stimulus (or choice),
whilst others seek to understand the influence on decision-making of ‘incidental’
1

Generally ‘affect’ refers to traits which are pervasive and broad and have longer duration, such as
good or bad feelings, 'emotions' are narrower and refer to particular states (for example, anger, fear,
happiness). The term ‘mood’ refers to a feeling that is low in intensity but has no specific object
(Finucane et al., 2003). Sometimes the terms affect or emotion are used to encompass all these
states.


25

affect, that is feelings such as mood states that are independent of the stimulus but
can influence the decision process.
The role of affect in decision-making
Peters et al. (2006) argue that both integrated and incidental affect have four
different roles in judgement and decision-making:
•

Affect can act as information – feelings about a choice are information that
guides decision-making and can shape the value of an alternative. These
feelings can be based on prior experiences or thoughts relevant to the choice
option and/or can be the result of a less relevant current state of emotion or
mood. Schwartz (2000) also notes that individuals are more likely to recall
information from memory that is congruent with their current feelings. Thus
feelings influence the information brought to bear on the decision.

•

By translating more complex thoughts into simpler affective evaluations of
choice options, people can compare good and bad feelings rather than
attempting to integrate a mass of conflicting logical reasons in more complex
decisions. Thus affective information may be more easily integrated into
judgements than non-affective information and act as a heuristic. Emotional
processes are faster than cognitive processes, so if an individual is under
increased pressure of time to make a choice, affect may have greater influence
than cognitive processes (Svenson, 2003). However, mood also influences
estimates of the outcome of a choice (Schwartz, 2000). Happy mood results in
overestimating the likelihood of positive outcomes and underestimating the
likelihood of negative outcomes and sad mood has the opposite effect. In this
way, affect may influence evaluations of all alternatives (Svenson, 2003).

•

Affect can act as a ‘spotlight’ – the extent or type of affective feelings focuses
the decision maker on new information and this new information is used to
guide the judgement.

•

Affect can be a motivator of information processing and behaviour. Affect is
linked to approach and avoidance behaviour; moreover, people tend to act to
maintain or attain positive mood states.

Finucane et al. (2003) put forward the Affect Heuristic theory, based on existing
empirical evidence on affect and decision-making. This suggests that positive and
negative feelings become attached to 'images'2 through learning. The pool of
affective feelings related to particular 'images' then serves as a cue for judgement
2

'Images' are defined as sounds, smells, visual impressions, ideas, words to which positive and
negative feelings have been attached through learning.

26

and decision-making. Using an affective impression can be easier and more efficient
than weighing up the pros and cons of various choices and thus can form a mental
short cut or heuristic, which guides reason and assigns priorities between goals.
Svenson (2003) posits the Diff Con Theory, based on the observation that a 'decision
maker must find or create an alternative that is sufficiently superior to its
competitor(s)' (p.290). Differentiation is the process by which a superior alternative is
identified and involves evaluation of the alternatives and changes in the
representation of the decision problem to increase the distance between alternatives.
Consolidation maintains this differentiation post-decision and protects against regrets.
Within this theory, both affect and cognitive processes are involved. Affect influences
both the way information is processed and the attractiveness of the information. In
addition, decision problems can also influence affect, for example having to decide
between a set of bad alternatives can induce negative mood.
Incidental affect is also linked to the extent of processing in decision-making.
Investigations of incidental affect have generally found that people engage in more
systematic processing when in negative emotional states or moods, whereas people
in positive states or moods engage in more heuristic processing (Tiedens and Linton,
2001).
Emotion-specific influences on decision-making
A number of writers have moved beyond investigation of valence (positive or
negative feelings), which suggests that all positive affect would lead to optimistic
judgements whereas all negative affect would lead to pessimistic judgements, to look
at emotion-specific influences on judgement and choice. Studies have found
differential effects for specific emotions. Lerner and Keltner (2000) found that the
negative emotions of fear and anger have different influences on judgement. They
found that fearful people made higher risk assessments, whereas angry people
made lower risk assessments. Other studies have found that sadness promotes
systematic processing, whereas anger encourages heuristic processing
(Bodenhausen, 1993; Lerner at al., 1998). Lerner and Tiedens (2006) reviewed
research on the impact of anger on judgement and decision-making, concluding that
anger has specific impacts leading to selective processing of information, increased
risk-taking and optimism.
Tiedens and Linton (2001) suggest that the effects of specific emotions on
processing are related to the certainty appraisal of these emotions. Studies of
emotion-appraisal associations show that specific emotions are reliably associated
with particular sets of appraisals, for example anger is associated with unpleasant
situations but certainty about what is happening; in contrast fear is also associated
with unpleasantness but with uncertainty about what has happened or will happen.
These patterns are consistent across a range of populations and using a range of
27

research methods. Tiedens and Linton concentrate on certainty and uncertainty –
anger, disgust, happiness, contentment are associated with certainty; hope, surprise,
fear, worry and, to an extent, sadness are associated with uncertainty. Empirical
work by Tiedens and Linton suggests that in decision-making, certainty-associated
emotions result in less substantive and more heuristic processing, whereas
uncertainty-associated emotions produce more thorough processing.
Lerner and Keltner (2000) explored both the certainty/uncertainty and individual
control/lack of control appraisals associated with specific emotions and suggested
that these influence judgements of risk, as they are ‘cognitive metafactors’ identified
in the risk literature as reliably determining risk assessment. These metafactors are
the level of ‘unknown risk’ – defined at its highest level as hazards judged to be
uncertain; and level of ‘dread risk’, defined at its highest level as perceived lack of
individual control (for example, McDaniels et al., 1997; Slovic, 1987). Fear involves
appraisals of low certainty and low individual control whereas anger involves
appraisals of high certainty and high individual control. If these appraisal tendencies
influence judgement, then fear should lead to pessimistic risk assessments and
anger should lead to optimistic risk assessments. On the other hand if valence is
more important, both fear and anger would lead to pessimistic assessments. Lerner
and Keltner’s (2000) study of 97 students found, as noted above, that fearful people
made higher risk assessments whereas angry people made lower risk assessments.
Their measures related to dispositional fear and anger, but they also found that
dispositional emotions predicted current state (momentary) emotions. They suggest
that the effects of dispositional emotions and momentary emotions will be similar but
may differ in magnitude, with dispositional emotions having greater effects. This is
likely because momentary emotions are likely to be consciously linked to a specific
cause and this should reduce the effect on judgements of other events. In contrast,
dispositions emerge early in life; remain stable over the life course (Helson and
Klohnen, 1998); are reflected in stable differences in underlying neurochemical
systems (Davidson, 1998); and are thought to focus as ongoing schemas for
organising and interpreting events (for example, Gasper and Clore, 1998).
An emotion that has received a considerable amount of attention in decision-making
research is regret. Connolly and Reb (2005) identify three types of regret:
•
Outcome regret – the target of regret is the outcome of the decision;
•
Option regret – the target of regret is the option chosen;
•
Process regret – here the target is the way in which the decision was made (for
example, too hasty, ill-informed).
Decision Justification Theory (Connolly and Zeelenberg, 2002) posits two
components of decision-related regret: one associated with evaluation of the
outcome of the decision, the other with self-blame for having made a poor (that is,
unjustified) choice. These two components do not necessarily occur together – an

28

individual can regret an outcome but feel that the decision process was justified, or
alternatively a good outcome can result from a poor decision. A number of empirical
studies illustrate this. For example, Clark et al. (2001) found that among men treated
for metastatic prostate cancer, those who expressed more regret about treatment
decisions were more dissatisfied with the decision-making process; they thought
they had received less information and were more likely to feel that they did not have
much of a choice.
Early studies (for example, Kahnemann and Tversky, 1982) indicated that a bad
outcome resulting from action seemed to engender more regret than the same bad
outcome resulting from inaction. However, findings on concurrent regret have been
contradictory. There is some evidence that people may regret inactions more than
actions in the short term, and this pattern was also shown in a series of studies
looking at real life retrospective regrets. In these circumstances, people tended to
recall more omissions than commissions, the opportunities they had passed up
rather than the actions they had taken (Gilovich and Medvec, 1995).
Lerner and Keltner (2000) suggest that there are boundaries to the influence of
emotion on judgement and choice and that people do make judgements independent
of their emotions in certain conditions. It is suggested that emotion-related appraisals
are automatic (for example, Lazarus, 1991) but are deactivated when individuals
become aware of their own judgement process, so conscious monitoring leads them
to focus on judgement-relevant information and downplay emotion. Several studies
support this – in particular, when people expected to be accountable for their
judgements, they examined the relevance of cues more carefully and current
feelings became less important (Lerner and Tetlock, 1999; Lerner et al., 1998).
The role of anticipated emotion
There is also evidence that decisions are influenced by anticipation of regret
(Zeelenberg, 1999). However, a number of studies suggest that people's ability to
predict future emotional states, including regret, is often poor. It is likely that in
temporally extended sequences of decisions, complex interactions will occur
between anticipated regret that influenced earlier decisions, experience of actual
regret resulting from these decisions, and anticipation of regret during subsequent
decisions. It is therefore important to explore decision makers' predictions of regret
before making a choice and before the outcomes of that choice are known, as well
as experienced regret after the consequences of the choice are apparent. It is also
important to distinguish between process, option and outcome regret.
Empirical research also indicates that subjects asked to think about the regret they
might experience after making a choice predominantly choose the safest option over
a potentially better but more risky option – it appears that thinking about regret leads
people to look for justifications for their choice (Simonson, 1992). In general people
29

are regret-averse and in many cases this results in risk-averse choices. However,
research also shows that anticipated regret may result in risk-seeking tendencies in
certain circumstances which relate to the likelihood of feedback on the different
options; that is, when there will always be feedback on the riskier option but only on
the safer option if chosen. This means that if choosing the safer option, the individual
risks finding out that the riskier option was better, but not vice versa (for example,
lotteries). Overall therefore, research shows that people are motivated to make
choices that protect them from post-decision feedback which will lead to regret about
foregone choices. Anticipated regret also seems to promote decision-aversion, that
is, a tendency to delay or avoid decisions (for example, Beattie et al., 1994).
Although anticipated regret has received the most attention in the literature as an
influence on choice, other emotions may play similar roles. Mellers et al. (1999)
suggest that people will choose the option with the greater subjective expected
pleasure, and Connolly and Butler (2006) found that a number of anticipated
emotions (regret, disappointment, rejoicing and elation) about the outcomes of
choice guide choice and predict choice behaviour. However, they also found that
these specific emotions did not predict choice more than general clusters of positive
and negative emotions.
Decision-generated emotion
It will be apparent from the discussion above that decisions can often be stressful
and therefore people need to deal with decision-generated negative emotion. A
decision situation presumes the existence of more than one, and often multiple,
options and there is therefore a need for trade-offs prioritising some goal(s) over
others. Luce (2005) puts forward a model of Emotional Trade-off Difficulty (ETD),
highlighting that two important coping motivations often co-exist. These are
motivation to work harder to successfully solve the choice problem and identify the
best option; and motivation to avoid particularly distressing decision operations, such
as explicit trade-offs between attributes. The ETD model proposes that this tension is
resolved by:
•
Making trade-offs implicitly rather than explicitly; focusing on only one, or a
subset of, attribute(s); and not addressing between-attribute trade-offs.
•
Preferring choices that are recommended by reasons independent of the
characteristics of the alternatives, for example, focusing on a doctor's
recommendation.
Efforts to cope with negative emotion in decision-making can thus affect the
decision-making process.
The ETD model has particular relevance to decisions regarding health conditions,
which are often characterised by difficult trade-offs. Efforts to minimise negative
emotion may result in avoidance of such trade-offs regardless of available
30

information. Indeed the provision of information relevant to trade-offs or the explicit
ceding of control over decisions to the patient may increase decision-related
negative emotion. This has implications for policies on patient involvement, choice
and control because where positive outcomes are not certain, patient control over a
decision may heighten stress by reducing the individual’s ability to cope by avoiding
decision trade-offs (Folkman, 1984). In addition, the key role of emotion in decisionmaking suggests that patients/service users would benefit from emotional as well as
informational decision support. Work on the information needs of children and young
people with chronic conditions and parents with disabled children (Beresford and
Sloper, 2003; Mitchell and Sloper, 2001) indicates the importance of such support in
using information.
Emotion in temporally extended choice
Temporally extended choice refers to choices that must be made repeatedly and
have consequences that change depending on what is chosen at each point. In this
situation, what is best at one point can be in conflict with what is best overall. People
often act as if choices only had immediate effects, but optimal choice in these
circumstances requires combining options across time to achieve the best overall
outcome. Much decision-making involves temporally extended choice – for example,
avoiding back pain requires many choices relating to physiotherapy exercises and
lifting behaviour to be made over time. In any one situation, the immediate choice
may be to carry out a task such as lifting a cared-for person, which may be of no
obvious immediate consequence; but the cumulative effects of such choices can be
very costly. Different processes may be involved in these situations. A motivational
dilemma may involve weighing the short-term and long-term alternatives; on the
other hand, many temporally extended choice situations may not involve high level
decision-making processes or even be perceived as choices.
Gray (1999) hypothesised that threat-related negative emotional states, including
stress, result in a bias to choose the alternatives that are most advantageous in the
short-term, even if those choices incur long-term costs. Empirical studies with
students supported his hypothesis, indicating that negative emotions (both taskrelated and more general emotions) biased people towards favouring immediate
consequences, despite costs to longer-term goals. Gray suggested that this may be
an effect of framing, depletion of cognitive resources or narrowing of attention, or a
combination of these factors. A framing account suggests that in negative emotional
states people frame a series of choices as an unrelated series of items, rather than
seeing the bigger picture. A cognitive resource account suggests that cognitive load
from the emotional state could disrupt implicit learning about the temporally extended
contingencies. Focusing of attention often occurs in emotionally arousing situations,
suggesting that this may also be a factor affecting narrowing of temporal attention.

31

Individual differences in emotionality and effects on decision-making
People differ in both their emotionality (that is, the intensity with which they
experience and express emotions) and their ability to regulate their emotions, and
these differences are related to the development of social competence (for example,
Eisenberg et al., 1997). It is suggested that children who are high in emotionality and
poor at regulating emotion will show deficits in social information processing
(Lemerise and Arsenio, 2000) and this then affects judgement and choice.
Implications for the Panel Study
Clearly decision-making is strongly influenced by emotional factors. Some of the
issues that will be important to be aware of and/or explore are:
•
The feelings individuals attach to different choice options and the role of past
experience in this, for example it is often suggested that parents’ own
experience of school affects their choices of school for their children.
•
The decision maker’s mood at the time of making choices – this is likely to
influence both information processing and the way in which options are viewed
– particularly in relation to perceived risks and optimism\pessimism about
options.
•
The role of regret – both about the outcome of a decision and the process by
which the decision was made. It will be important to explore this over time. How
does regret about an earlier decision influence a later decision?
•
There is considerable potential for anticipated emotions, particularly anticipated
regret but also anticipated pleasure, in the situations of choice that we will be
looking at. We might explore how people’s judgements of how different options
would make them feel influenced the choices they made. Also how did this
affect the decision-making process itself; for example, in situations where
anticipated regret is high, does this lead people to delay/avoid decisions?
•
The process of decision-making can itself be stressful. Do people experience
stress by having to make choices? Does this lead to a narrowed focus on option
attributes and more reliance on professionals’ judgement? What are the longerterm consequences of this? How does this affect what choices people do/do not
want to make? A key factor may be what emotional support people receive
when making the decision. Who provides this? Do professionals see this as part
of their role?
•
Many situations we look at may be ones of temporally extended choices. How
do people think about these choices? How do they balance short-term and
longer-term considerations? Do they treat each choice as if it would only have
immediate effects or do they consider the longer-term effects? How do current
emotions, particularly stress, influence this? What are the characteristics/
situations of those who take the longer-term or short-term view?

32

•
•

Individual differences in emotionality are likely to influence choices. We need to
be aware of this but we can’t directly investigate it in the study.
The finding that conscious monitoring of decision-making leads people to focus
more on information and downplay emotion has considerable implications for
the study. Will being involved in the study lead people to focus more
consciously on their decision-making processes? How do we avoid this? Can
we avoid it or do we just accept and acknowledge the possibility of
contamination of the sample? If we can’t avoid it, how do we monitor it?

Individual differences and choice/decision-making
Personality and choice/decision-making
Whilst it is acknowledged that personality factors will affect choice-making, this is not
an area which has been systematically examined. Personality research is a vast and
disparate literature with numerous models and theories and, similar to the decisionmaking literature, there is no over-arching model or set of principles. As a result
there are discrete pockets of research which have looked one particular facet of
personality (for example, locus of control, risk taking) and its impact on decisionmaking; or have approached the issue from a particular theoretical standpoint (for
example, trait theory).
However, drawing both on theories of choice and decision-making and our
understanding of personality, it is possible to draw up some general principles about
the way personality will affect choice-making. What is clear is that personality factors
influence all aspects of the choice-making process, including:
•
The way a situation/problem is perceived;
•
The extent to which a person wants to take control of making a decision;
•
The extent to which a person uses/seeks out information;
•
The desire to involve others in the decision-making process;
•
The person’s preferred decision-making style;
•
The type of decision they made;
•
The extent to which a person feels the need to justify their decision to others.
Different personality theories have alternative views on the way that personality
factors will interact and affect these various stages and processes. In addition, there
is a further body of research looking at the impact of personality on the development
of beliefs, attitudes and coping styles, all of which have been implicated in theories of
decision-making.
Implications for the Panel Study
It is important to bear in mind that differences in personality are likely to impact on
joint-decision-making situations. There is clearly potential for differences in

33

personality to interfere and disrupt the shared decision-making processes, including
expert and non-expert decision-making situations (Clack et al., 2004). In addition, the
effectiveness of professional support in decision-making would, to some extent,
appear to be dependent on the extent to which that support is sensitive to, and can
be tailored to, differences in personality. Finally, in relation to the groups represented
in the panel study, it will be important to bear in mind the evidence on the adverse
effect of the experience of disability on internal psychological factors such as selfefficacy, self-esteem and locus of control (for example, Hirst and Baldwin, 1986).
For this project it is important to be aware that factors such as personality influence
the decision-making process. It will not be possible to explore this issue per se within
the project, however.
Choice and cognitive capacity
The psychological theories of choice and decision-making described earlier highlight
the fact that making choices can be highly costly in terms of the cognitive effort
associated with gathering and then assessing and comparing information. Not
unsurprisingly, therefore, within psychological research on choice/decision-making
theory there is a body of work on the impact of ‘cognitive capacity’ on choice-making.
This includes work on the effect of drugs (for example, opiates), personality
disorders and other mental health problems, neurodegenerative disease, brain injury,
ageing and learning disabilities on the decision-making process and decision-making
efficacy. In addition, there has been work which has looked at ‘softer’ differences in
cognitive capacity (such as numeracy skills) and their impact on performance in
decision tasks. All this work is based on the notion that impairments of, or limitations
in, cognitive capacity will impact on choice/decision-making ability.
In some cases the purpose of the research has been to shed further light on the
cognitive processes underlying decision-making. Other research is more concerned
with the way that impairments in cognitive capacity may affect people’s ability to
make choices about treatments or health care, their participation in research, and to
manage everyday life decisions (for example, financial management). It is this notion
of capacity that is reflected in the Mental Capacity Act (2005) and we explore this
issue below on making decisions on behalf of someone else.
There is, in addition, a separate body of literature on the meaning of choice and the
exercise of choice by disabled people (for example, Wre, 2004; Harris, 2003;
Lancioni et al., 1996). Within this literature there is some resistance to the emphasis
on cognitive capacity as the sole indicator of a person’s ability to take decisions. It is
argued that social and environmental factors also have significant roles to play in
developing decision-making skills and facilitating and supporting decision-making
among people with learning difficulties (for example, Suto et al., 2005; Harris, 2003).
This is also reflected in the Mental Capacity Act, with its emphasis on provision of
34

support and information in appropriate and simple forms; and its recognition that
decision-making capacity should be assessed for particular decisions, and not seen
as a general characteristic of the individual.
In the following sections we review the findings from research on the impact of
specific impairments in cognitive capacity on decision-making processes. A lot of this
research has been carried out on specific populations or on particular conditions. We
have endeavoured from this to extract key, over-arching issues.
Cognitive ability
In laboratory experiments, general measures of cognitive ability have been found to
be associated with decision-making performance, with performance being adversely
affected with increasing decision task complexity (for example, Gonzalez et al.,
2005). There is a body of more applied research which has shown that impaired
cognitive abilities (for example, as a result of learning difficulties, ageing) affect
decision-making abilities in general. This research is based on, as opposed to testing,
the assumption that decision-making is a complex and cognitively demanding activity
which requires certain cognitive skills and capacities. Such work does not tend,
however, to explore the ways different aspects of the decision-making processes are
or may be affected by impaired cognitive ability(ies).
Memory
Impairments in memory, particularly working memory, have been found to affect
decision-making capacity (Stroup et al., 2005). Working memory refers to the
structures and processes used for temporarily storing and manipulating information.
Other researchers have found that the decision-making strategies used, and the
extent to which individuals are able to shift to more effective strategies, are related to
working memory capacity.
Numeracy
Research suggests that numeracy per se (as opposed to being used as an indicator
of general intelligence) is an important factor in decision-making (Peters et al., 2006).
Numeracy skills have been found to influence the types of decision strategies used
to compare different options and, overall, this is thought to be beneficial.
The pre-frontal region of the brain
The pre-frontal region of the brain is the area of the brain which supports reasoning
and decision-making. In the absence of any other cognitive impairment, damage to
this region (through, for example, traumatic brain injury, neurodegenerative disease)
has been found to affect decision-making ability (Denburg et al., 2005; Fellows and
Farah, 2005; Brand et al., 2004; Fellows., 2004; Stout et al., 2001).

35

Choice and decision making by people with severe and profound
developmental disabilities
In 1996, Lanciono et al. published a review of evidence on choice research with
people with severe and profound developmental disabilities. It should be emphasised
that the research they identified was concerned with experiments which explored
choice and preferences in relation to familiar and concrete objects and/or activities.
With respect to these, Lanciono et al. concluded that, when presented in an
accessible way, most people with severe or profound developmental disabilities can
make choices and express preferences about food and drink items, types of
stimulation (for example, music, rocking) and activities. Laciono et al’s. review also
highlighted the importance of the environment and access to technologies to
facilitate the expression of choice or preference. Developing the ability to make these
sorts of choices may require practice. It may also demand specific skills on the part
of professionals and/or family members in order to understand both an individual’s
possibly idiosyncratic way of communication and the context in which a
communication behaviour is observed. As Ware (2004) observes, sometimes a
behaviour indicating a preference will be observed (for example, a smile, relaxation
of muscles) but it will not have been intentionally communicated by the person.
What is significant here is that none of the evidence reviewed by Lanciono et al.
(1996) or subsequent research (for example, Schepis et al., 1996) has concerned
choices between events which will be on-going (that is, where a choice fixes what
will happen next week or month) or future events (Ware, 2004). Such choices or
decisions, Ware notes, require a ‘relatively advanced level of cognitive development’
(p.177) and cannot be made by people with severe and profound developmental
disabilities. Ware concludes:
This is not to suggest that the task of trying to ascertain the views of
people with profound and multiple learning disabilities should be
abandoned. Rather we need to be realistic about the extent to which it is
possible to ascertain the views of those with the most complex needs
about complex issues. We need, on the one hand, to see the task of
enabling someone to express their views as a learning/teaching task
which may be very long-term, and on the other, when major decisions
need to be taken about their future, we need to work out how best to take
account of their likes, dislikes, strengths and needs.
(p.178)
Clearly, proxies need to be involved in these situations. However, evidence suggests
the use of proxies is not without its own issues. Cummins' (2002) review of research
which has looked at proxies’ abilities to judge the well-being of people with learning
difficulties concluded that proxies with the closest relationships with the individual are
the most reliable proxies; however, their own values and attitudes bias the
inferences they draw. Additionally, the use of proxies is most likely to be problematic

36

in situations where the individual has extremely limited communication. The issue of
proxies (or surrogate decision-makers) is discussed further below.
Implications for the Panel Study
The brief overview provided above reiterates the fact that making complex decisions
is cognitively demanding. There may be instances in the ‘sudden onset’ group that
we recruit people who have experienced an abrupt and significant change in their
cognitive abilities and who are now struggling to make decisions or who are being
excluded, or only peripherally included, in decision-making. It will also be interesting
to explore/describe the strategies professional and family members use to support
decision-making by those with cognitive impairments.
In terms of individuals with severe or profound learning difficulties or substantial
cognitive impairment following brain trauma, questions need to be addressed about
whether, how, and the rationale of, including these individuals in this project.
Furthermore, if the decision is taken to include them then the issues explored with
the carers/professionals involved may need to be modified to explore issues such as
feelings and experiences of acting as proxies; confidence in understanding what the
individual is communicating; and beliefs about the individual’s choice- or decisionmaking capacities. These questions are explored further in the next section.

37

38

Section 4:

Specific Decision-Making Situations

Making decisions on behalf of someone else
Literature on decision-making on behalf of another person centres around ‘proxy’ or
‘surrogate’ decision makers3 and parents making decisions on behalf of their children.
The situation is different for each of these groups. As far as surrogates are
concerned, their role is to make a decision on behalf of someone who lacks capacity
to do this themselves. They may be relatives, friends, carers or professionals, and
may or may not have been designated by the person concerned as their surrogate.
Much of the literature focuses on consent to health care treatment, including end-oflife decision-making. A key issue is establishing capacity and there are legal
standards on consent capacity (see below). In contrast, parents already have legal
responsibility for making decisions on behalf of their children (under 16 years).
However, the role of children and young people in decision-making is increasingly
being recognised and promoted. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child (1989) Article 12 emphasises children's rights to express their views on matters
that affect them and to have these views given 'due weight'. In addition, the National
Service Framework for Children, Young People and Maternity Services states that
services are required to 'give children, young people and their parents increased
information, power and choice over the support and treatment they receive, and
involve them in planning their care and services' (DH/DfES, 2004: p.9). Whilst it is by
no means universal that children are consulted when decisions are made on their
behalf, children’s participation is becoming more common (Cavet and Sloper, 2004a).
Nevertheless, disabled children are less likely to be involved in decisions than their
non-disabled peers (Cavet and Sloper, 2004b). In addition, with the presumption of
parental responsibility, less attention is focused on establishing a child’s capacity
than is the case for adults.
Capacity and the law
In England, the most recent legislation dealing with decision-making capacity is the
Mental Capacity Act 2005. This states key principles:
A person must be assumed to have capacity unless it is established that
he lacks capacity.
A person is not to be treated as unable to make a decision unless all
practicable steps to help him to do so have been taken without success.

3

These terms appear to be used interchangeably but surrogate is slightly more common, and will be
used in this document.

39

A person is not to be treated as unable to make a decision merely
because he makes an unwise decision.
Before the act is done, or the decision is made, regard must be had to
whether the purpose for which it is needed can be as effectively achieved
in a way that is less restrictive of the person's rights and freedom of action.
The Act also defines the meaning of lacking capacity:
For the purposes of this Act, a person lacks capacity in relation to a
matter if at the material time he is unable to make a decision for himself in
relation to the matter because of an impairment of, or a disturbance in the
functioning of, the mind or brain.
It does not matter whether the impairment or disturbance is permanent or
temporary.
A lack of capacity cannot be established merely by reference to:
(a) a person's age or appearance, or
(b) a condition of his, or an aspect of his behaviour, which might lead others to
make unjustified assumptions about his capacity.
The Act specifically excludes people under 16.
In deciding how to establish whether a person is unable to make decision for
him/herself, the Act states that lack of capacity should be decided ‘on the balance of
probabilities’ and sets out the following criteria. The person should be unable to:
•
Understand the information relevant to the decision;
•
Retain the information;
•
Use or weigh that information as part of the process of making the decision; or
•
Communicate the decision (whether by talking, using sign language or any
other means).
A person should not be regarded as unable to understand information if s/he is able
to understand an explanation of it in a form appropriate to him/her (for example,
simple language, visual aids etc). The fact that someone is only able to retain
information relevant to a decision for a short period does not prevent him/her from
being regarded as able to make the decision. Information relevant to a decision
includes information about the foreseeable consequences of deciding one way or
another or failing to make the decision.
These provisions are decision-specific – that is, what should be assessed is the
person’s capacity to take a particular decision at a particular time.
Legal scholars in the US identify similar standards for capacity (Allen and Shuster,
2002): the ability to communicate a choice; the ability to appreciate the

40

consequences of the choice; the ability to understand relevant information; and the
ability to rationally manipulate the information and give reasons for one’s choice. It is
clear from the above that these standards focus on the process of decision-making
rather than the final decision made. Indeed, whilst some authors add to these
conditions that individuals also make the most reasonable choice (for example,
Marson et al., 1996), this is specifically excluded in the Mental Capacity Act. This
focus on process highlights the importance of cognitive abilities. Whilst simple
cognitive abilities may provide the capacity to state a choice, higher order abilities
are needed to manipulate information, appreciate consequences and be able to give
reasons for a choice (Allen and Shuster, 2002).
If lack of capacity is established, then someone else must make the decision on
behalf of the individual. This must be done in the person’s best interests and the
Mental Capacity Act provides a checklist of factors to use in establishing best
interests. This includes what the person’s views would be – sometimes known as
‘substituted judgement’. However, empirical research has shown that here are
considerable difficulties with predicting what people’s decisions might have been.
Research on surrogate decision-making
There have been a number of empirical studies on surrogate decision-making.
These appear to be largely atheoretical and concentrate on assessing how
accurately surrogates reflect their relatives’ views. A systematic review (Shalowitz et
al., 2006) identified 16 eligible studies involving 2595 surrogate-patient pairs, and
19526 paired patient-surrogate responses, which provided empirical data on how
accurately surrogates predict patients’ treatment preferences. In these studies, which
used 151 hypothetical scenarios, surrogates were instructed to make the treatment
decision the patient would have made if able. The studies sampled a range of
different populations; terminally ill, outpatients, chronic disease, women aged over
70. The review found that overall surrogates predicted patients’ treatment
preferences with 68 per cent accuracy (95 per cent CI, 63-72). They were most
accurate in scenarios involving patients’ current health (79 per cent) and use of
antibiotics (72 per cent), and least accurate in scenarios involving dementia (58 per
cent) and stroke (58 per cent).
The review also looked at results from two types of interventions to improve
surrogate decision-making. Five studies compared asking patients to designate their
own surrogate versus assigning surrogates based on a legal hierarchy. Two further
studies asked patients to discuss their values and treatment preferences with
potential surrogates. There was no difference in accuracy between patientdesignated surrogates and legally assigned surrogates, and the surrogate’s
relationship with the patient was not significantly related to accuracy. Of the two
studies assessing the impact of discussion of patients’ treatment preferences, one

41

found no difference and the other found a slight but significant worsening of
surrogate accuracy after discussion.
Despite these somewhat negative results, four studies included in Shalowitz et al’s
(2006) review found that surrogates predict patients’ preferences more accurately
than physicians.
These findings are not surprising as, in general, social psychological research
indicates that people overestimate the extent to which their own opinions and
choices are shared by others – they ‘project’ their own characteristics on to others.
Similarly, Fagerlin et al. (2001) found that sons’ and daughters’ predictions more
closely resembled their own preferences than those of their parents, as did those of
surrogates chosen by adults aged 65+. However these ‘projective’ predictions were
not less accurate than counter projective predictions. In the absence of other
information, projection can be a reasonable strategy and may operate as a
judgement heuristic.
The literature focuses mainly, but not wholly, on surrogates’ predictions in life-saving
situations, so may not reflect accuracy in non-life-saving situations. All the studies
used hypothetical scenarios and it is not clear what impact this has on accuracy. The
fact that greatest accuracy was achieved in scenarios about current health may
suggest that surrogate decision-making would be more accurate in real life. On the
other hand, the stress of real life situations may have the opposite effect. Decisionmaking may increase stress for surrogates when they are not confident about what
the patient would have wanted or do not themselves fully understand the risks and
benefits of treatment (Allen and Shuster, 2002). The difficulty of predicting patients’
preferences is also highlighted by Hiltunen et al’s. (1999) study of end-of-life
treatment decisions, which found that vacillation in decisions was common for both
patients and surrogates.
We have not been able to find many studies on other factors that influence surrogate
decision-making, although one study investigated ethnic differences in end-of-life
decision making by proxies (Hopp and Duffy, 2000). The study interviewed 540
relatives about advanced care planning and end-of-life decisions for their family
member who died. The study found that treatment decisions for white people were
more likely to involve limiting care in some situations and withholding treatment
before death, completing living wills and designating power of attorney for health
care. Treatment decisions for black people were more likely to be based on the
desire to provide all care possible to prolong life. These differences were significant
even after controlling for socio-demographic factors.

42

Research on parent decision-making
There are a number of studies focusing on parents making decisions for and with
their children, covering a range of decision-making scenarios. These studies are
mainly descriptive and few are based on theoretical frameworks. Most studies focus
on medical decisions: insertion of gastrostomy tubes (Guerriere et al., 2003); surgery
(leg lengthening - Daniel et al., 2005, hand surgery - Bradbury et al., 1994, cardiac
transplantation - Higgins and Kayser-Jones, 1996); cancer treatment (Ruccione et al.,
1991; Hinds et al., 1997); life-sustaining treatment (Kirschbaum, 1996);
immunizations (Wroe et al., 2004); psychotherapy (Gustafson et al., 1994). A few
focus on other situations, including choice of child care (Fulmer, 1997) and
disclosure to a child of the child’s HIV status (Lester et al., 2002). They include
qualitative, quantitative and multi-method studies. In contrast to the literature on
surrogates, most of these studies focus on real life decision-making, although two
(child care and psychotherapy decisions) used hypothetical situations.
Key factors identified as influencing parents’ decision-making are:
•
Parents’ emotional response. This includes anxiety at the time; anticipated
regret; and feelings of responsibility if harm occurs to the child as a result of the
decision or if parents don’t give the child a chance for treatment, even though
the odds of success may be low (Daniel et al., 2005; Wroe et al., 2004;
Guerriere et al., 2003; Higgins and Kayser-Jones, 1996; Bradbury et al., 1994;
Ruccione et al., 1991):
If we’d done it and failed, well, we’d have to live with that…but not to
have tried at all, then I think we would have been failing her and
ourselves’.
(Bradbury et al., 1994: p.24)
Anticipated regret also included the fear that the child would later criticise the
parent for the decision they took (Bradbury et al., 1994).
Interestingly, attitudes towards action versus inaction and anticipated regret
were found to be important in Wroe et al's. study of decisions regarding early
childhood immunization. In this study 195 mothers completed questionnaires
antenatally on perceptions of risk and benefits of immunization and then were
contacted later (when the baby was 10 weeks old) about whether the child had
been immunized. Non-immunizers had higher antenatal ratings of anticipated
responsibility for harm that occurs following action and greater anticipated
regret of that action. Immunizers had higher anticipated responsibility for harm
that occurs following inaction and greater anticipated regret of that inaction.
These emotional factors were better predictors of the likelihood of immunizing
their child than perceptions of physical risks and benefits.

43

The effects of emotion on information processing and recall are indicated by
Ruccione et al's. (1991) finding that parents with higher levels of anxiety were
more likely to believe that the risks of treatment for their child's cancer were not
explained clearly.
•

Responsibility as parents, both for the child concerned and for the rest of the
family. Parents distinguished between their child’s and their own interests and
tried to balance the child’s best interests with their own needs, as well as needs
of other family members (Daniel at al., 2005; Higgins and Kayser-Jones, 1996;
Kirschbaum, 1996; Bradbury et al., 1994). For example, in the case of lifesustaining treatment, parents wanted their child to have more time to
experience life and they wanted more time for themselves with their child.
However, this had to be balanced against the child’s suffering and quality of life.
When parents decided that this was not a life the child would wish for they
sought to withdraw treatment (Kirschbaum, 1996). Parents also considered the
anticipated effects on the family of their decisions about the care of their ill child
(Kirschbaum, 1996).

•

The child’s involvement in decision-making. In the case of all but very young
children (around age six), parents believed that their role was to help the child
make the decision that was right for the child (Daniel et al., 2005; Kirschbaum,
1996; Hinds et al., 1997; Bradbury et al., 1994). Similarly, in the case of
disclosure to the child of HIV status (Lester et al., 2002), children aged six and
over had a key influence on parents’ decision to disclose because of their
questions and their ability to participate (or not) in treatments. Where parents
were not able to involve the child in decision-making, they were concerned to
respect the best interests of the child and to try to project what the child might
want (Kirschbaum, 1996). As noted above, this included distinguished the
child's own interests from their 'selfish needs' as parents.

•

Information from and trust in professionals. The role of professionals in
information provision is highlighted in a number of studies (Guerriere et al.,
2003; Hinds et al., 1997; Higgins and Kayser-Jones, 1996; Bradbury et al.,
1994). In addition, needs for different kinds and sources of information are
highlighted in Guerriere et al's. (2003) study of decisions about gastrostomy
tube insertion. Twenty (out of 50) mothers in this study felt that they did not
have an adequate amount of, and/or the right type of, information before
making the decision. Information from other mothers whose children had had
the procedure was lacking but felt to be potentially a valuable aid in decision
making. Parents used information to inform them about the gains and losses
that would be associated with the decision alternatives, but studies indicate that
use of information is by no means straightforward. Studies show that parents
include both reasons inconsistent with evidence-based information and

44

emotional reasons in their decision-making (Wroe et al., 2004; Higgins and
Kayser-Jones, 1996; Gustafson et al., 1994) and that emotional factors were
more important in the decision than informational factors. Kirschbaum (1996)
suggests that parents' beliefs about spiritual/supernatural versus natural
reasons for why their child had a life-threatening illness partly shaped whether
their decision-making was guided mostly by faith and hope or by information
seeking and mastery. In addition, trust in the person who provided the
information and the quality of communication and interaction with the person
providing the information was found to be more influential than the information
itself (Hinds et al., 1997; Bradbury et al., 1994).
•

Uncertainty about outcome is a key factor in the decisions studied and a small
number of studies examined the effects of personal variables in decisionmaking strategies used by parents in these situations. Fulmer (1997) identified
two major strategies in parents' decisions regarding child care (in a hypothetical
situation). These strategies were:
a) 'compensatory' – involves high levels of information processing in which
the maximum amount of information is accessed; and weighing of
alternatives against each other on all dimensions deemed relevant.
b) 'non-compensatory' – involves reduced processing and less cognitive
effort, accomplished by employing rules by which an alternative can be
accepted or rejected quickly after only an incomplete search of its
dimensions. There is no attempt to weigh an advantage on one dimension
with a disadvantage on another. This strategy implies use of 'skilled
omission' and is deemed to be more cognitively efficient (Ettenson et al.,
1987).
Fulmer found that parents with more years of formal education and higher
levels of parental awareness (understanding of child behaviour, child
development and their role as a parent) used less information (noncompensatory strategies) and more variable patterns in searching for
information.
Ruccione et al. (1991), in a study of parents making decisions about consent to
treatment for childhood cancer, found that parents with higher levels of
education were more likely to think that risks had been explained clearly but
also that they had not been given enough time to make the decision.

•

Pressure from people or time. One study (Guerriere et al., 2003) explored
whether parents felt under pressure to make a particular decision. Half the
parents in the study reported feeling pressure from health professionals and
family members (12 reported pressure to refuse gastrostomy and 13 to agree).
Another study (Fulmer, 1997) investigated the effects of time pressure on

45

decision-making strategies but found no differences in strategies employed with
and without time pressure and the personal factors influencing these.
•

Spontaneous v logical decision-making. Spontaneous decision-making has
been defined as an instantaneous choice without a process of deliberation. One
explanation of this is that it avoids pre-decision conflict. Higgins and KayserJones (1996) found that five out of 15 parents making decisions about cardiac
transplantation made spontaneous decisions (four chose transplant, one no
treatment). The remaining 10 used logical decision-making behaviours (six
chose transplant, three palliative surgical intervention and one no treatment).
Logical decision makers preferred to have more autonomy and participation in
decisions and spontaneous decision makers preferred less autonomy and
wanted to be guided completely by the physician's recommendations.
Kirschbaum (1996) suggests that the timing of decisions in relation to the
course of the child's illness was important in the type of decision-making used.
Early in the course of the illness, when there was urgency to decide, parents
were likely to make a choice based on one key consideration – that the child
should live - and did not deliberate when faced with giving consent to an
intervention. When there was less urgency and they had time to consider
alternatives, parents were more likely give weight to projected quality of life in
their decision.

Implications for the Panel Study
The literature on parent and surrogate decision making highlights the need for us to
clarify who we focus on in the panel study as this will influence sample selection
criteria and interviewing strategies. There are three decision-making situations that
could be included:
•
The person making a decision for themselves.
•
The person making a decision jointly with a parent(s) or carer(s).
•
Surrogate(s) or parent(s) making a decision on behalf of a disabled person who
lacks capacity to make the decision.
We will include the first two situations and the third may occur during the study if
people's capacity changes. However, we can also include people who lack capacity
at the recruitment stage. We should be aware that the sorts of choices we are
looking at go beyond the simple capacity to state a choice and require higher order
abilities to understand and process information and be able to reason and predict/
appreciate consequences. On this basis, there are a considerable number of young
people (particularly those with central nervous system disorders) and adults with
impairments such as stroke, who fall into the category of lacking capacity.

46

The topics we might focus on in interviews with surrogates/parents include:
•
Any previous discussions with the disabled adult/young person that have
informed their current choices.
•
Their level of confidence about what the person would have wanted and how
this affects decision-making.
•
The role of the surrogate/parent’s emotional state (both current and anticipated)
in decision-making.
•
How surrogates/parents balance the disabled child/adult's interests with their
own interests and those of other family members.
•
How they involve adults/young people who have limited capacity in the
decisions.
•
Other factors (for example, cultural, familial, level of understanding of
information) that affect the surrogate’s/parent’s decisions.
•
Influence of anticipated regret (see also Section 3 on emotion and decisionmaking).
•
The role of information from and trust in professionals and others.
•
Perception of pressure from others.
•
Perception of time pressure and urgency of decisions.
•
The way in which information is used.
•
How the process of making the decision takes place, in particular which
decisions are spontaneous without a process of deliberation, and which
decisions are the outcome of a process of deliberation and why. What type of
decision-making do they prefer?

Shared decision-making
Shared decision-making: advice seeking
Shared decision-making (SDM) is the main term used to describe decision-making
between a professional (typically a doctor) and a lay person (patient or other service
user). There is an enormous literature on shared decision-making addressing
questions such as: Why it is important? What is needed to achieve it? Does it really
happen? What is it like to experience it? What are the outcomes of SDM?
Whilst shared decision-making is not the main focus of the panel study, the research
will involve interviews with key individuals who have been involved in/supported
decision-making. Jungerman and Fischer (2005) provide a useful model of
understanding the dynamics of this particular joint decision-making situation,
focusing particularly on whether or not expert advice is accepted or rejected. They
suggest that ‘informational asymmetry’ characterises expert - non-expert decisionmaking situations (see Figure 4).

47

Figure 4:

Differences in knowledge between advisor and client

Advisor
1. Generalized knowledge about
client’s problems.

Client
1. Individual knowledge about
personal problem.

2. Extensive knowledge about
relevant facts.

2. Little knowledge about relevant
facts.

3. Statistical knowledge about
client’s goals and values.

3. Limited awareness about
personal goals and values.

4. Professional experience with
decision outcomes, coping
behaviours, and client’s biases.

4. Little, if any, experience with
problem-related decision
consequences, coping
possibilities, and judgemental
demands.

5. Explicit knowledge of decision
strategies, implicit decision
competence and routines.

5. No explicit procedural expertise,
implicit (unrelated) competence.

6. Professional expertise with
client’s decision-making
behaviour.

6. Little, if any, experience with
advisor’s decision strategies

(Jungerman and Fischer, 2005, p.159)
Jungerman and Fischer argue that this asymmetry prevents decision-making
occurring according to traditional theories of decision-making and leads to different
decision-making strategies being adopted. The ‘uninformed client’ does not have the
access to information to weigh up options and, in a sense, is wanting to short cut that
process by seeking expert advice. The expert, through their experience of being
involved in numerous similar decisions, does not undertake an analytic examination
of the options but instead the decision about which advice to give and which
recommendations to make is rapid, using established heuristics. In essence,
therefore, the two individuals involved in the decision-making process are using
different strategies to achieve a decision. In addition, Jungerman and Fischer argue
that the advisor (and not just the information they are imparting) plays a significant
role in the decision taken, see Figure 5.

48

Figure 5:

Difference in decision-making strategies between advisor and
client

Advisor
1. Is aware of client’s
(in)competence, relies on
experience and routines.

Client
1. Cannot and does not want to
explore all the options, asks for
advice.

2. Knows that a recommendation is
expected, is prepared to explain
and justify.

2. Expects a recommendation (and
is willing to pay for it).

3. Applies particular heuristics.

3. Directs attention to recommended
option, searches and stores
information selectively.

4. Focuses on clients and their
features, categorizes clients.

4. Focuses on advisors and their
features, evaluate their credibility.

5. Decision: recommendation of the
matching option(s).

5. Decision: acceptance or rejection
of the advice.

(Jungerman and Fischer, 2005, p.161)
Jungermann and Fischer (2005) proposed that four factors influence whether or not
an individual accepts advice:
•
The judgement of the advisor regarding the recommended option;
•
The judgement of the client regarding the recommended option;
•
The advisor’s credibility and extent to which the client trusts the advisor;
•
The client’s confidence in his/her own judgement.
Research evidence produced by Jungermann and Fischer (2005) and others
supports this model (for example, Sniezek and Buckley, 1995; Harvey et al., 2000;
Harvey and Fischer, 1997). For example, Oehler (1995) found that the quality of the
advisors in a bank was rated as more important by customers than the bank’s
conditions and offers. Interestingly, perceived credibility of the institution in which the
expert works can also affect whether or not advice is accepted (Sniezek and Buckley,
1995).
Implications for the Panel Study
Jungerman and Fischer’s model provides a useful way of understanding how people
involved in the panel study may use experts to assist with decision-making. It flags
up the differences between this and other joint decision-making situations. In relation
49

to the interviews with key individuals planned for the study, it would be interesting to
explore with them their judgements and reasoning (specific to the person/family in
question) in relation to the information and advice they provided and the strategies
they used to support decision-making.
In relation to participants, issues of trust and credibility would be interesting to
explore, especially where decisions were made against professional advice. Finally,
this model assumes relative naivety. However, it could be argued that the people in
the study are, or become during the course of the study, less naïve and more expert
and perhaps more confident in their own judgements – it would be interesting to
explore whether this happens over the duration of the project.

Decision-making within close relationships
Theoretical models of decision-making do not yet properly explain or take account of
decision-making in close relationships. In trying to understand this particular
decision-making context we have therefore had to turn towards empirical research.
The (potentially) relevant literature is a relatively diverse and difficult to identify. We
summarise below some of the key approaches and areas of work which are likely to
be of interest to the panel study.
The relevance of research on group decision-making
There is a large literature on group decision-making and this has been used to
inform the development of theories of group decision-making and problem solving.
However, most of this work is based on research which has used groups formed
expressly for the purposes of a piece of research. In contrast, couples and families
bring, amongst other things, pre-existing roles; a knowledge of each others' values,
aspirations and expectations; and a history of joint decision-making to each decisionmaking situation. In addition, the relationship that exists between the two decisionmakers will have a significant impact on the decision-making process. These key
differences between ‘experimental groups’ and family units are clear obstacles to
generalising from research on group decision-making to decision-making within
families.
Dyadic decision-making: the relationship factor
Joint decision-making is a central feature of any close relationship. As Kirchler et al.
(2001) note: ‘decisions determine the quality of the relationship, and [that] conversely,
the kind of decision-making process is determined by relationship quality’ (p.227).
Dyadic decision-making is the term used to refer to decision-making within the
context of a pre-existing, close relationship. Researchers argue that dyadic decision-

50

making is distinctly different to other ‘configurations’ of decision-making. The
relationship between the two decision-makers is not only something that has to be
taken account of within the decision making processes, but also impacts on the way
decisions are achieved.
Summarising the findings of research (Kenny and Acitelli, 1989; Poole and
Billingsley, 1989; Sillars and Kalhbesch, 1989), Cicirelli (2006) noted that the
features of dyadic decision-making ‘involved implicit understandings, limited
discussion, abbreviated comments, mental shortcuts in thinking, and brief
conversations to reach a quick decision rather than a long deliberation… [and that]
decision-making was facilitated or hindered depending on the quality or closeness of
the relationship between the two decision-makers’ (p.209). Poole and Billingsley
(1989) also found that maintaining the relationship could be as important (to one or
both of the decision-makers) as making an effective decision (see also Kirchler et al.,
2001). Finally, findings from research suggest that the decision-making process is
dominated by the dyad member with the greater power in the relationship, with that
power arising from greater expertise, authority or interpersonal skills (March, 1994;
Poole and Billingsley, 1989).
The relative importance of the relationship: an issue of power
It has been argued that within the parent-child relationship, the importance vested in
the relationship by the two parties changes and develops over the life course: the socalled notion of ‘developmental stake’ (Bengston and Kuypers, 1971; Fingerman,
2001). Cicirelli (2006) suggests that among adult children and their elderly parents,
adult children hold greater power because they have less vested in the relationship
than the parent who may be dependent on them for care, social contact and so on.
The impact of this power imbalance was observed by Cicirelli with respect to
(hypothetical) dyadic care-giving decision situations. The adult child dominated the
decision-making and, in situations of conflict, parents were significantly more likely to
capitulate or compromise than the adult children (Cicirelli, 2006).
Decision-making between intimate couples
As well as more general research on dyadic decision-making, there are further
bodies of research on decision-making between couples. This is neither cohesive
nor consistently based on a set of theoretical frameworks. It tends to be located
within specific topics and, with the exception of consumer behaviour research, is
generally descriptive as opposed to theory-generating. It covers the following areas:
•

Therapeutic research: typically focusing either on the way that inequities of
power within the decision-making relationship can lead to relationship difficulties,
or on interventions to improve negotiation and decision-making in relationships.
This work is based on theoretical models of marital negotiation (for example,
Godwin and Scanzoni, 1989).
51

•

Sexual decision-making: there is a distinct body of work which examines
contraceptive choice and other aspects of sexual decision-making (for example,
Zak et al., 1998; Miller and Pasta, 2001; Harvey et al., 2003; Ko and Mueke,
2005). One of the key themes of this work has been to explore cultural
differences in terms of perceived roles and issues of power and how that relates
to joint or sole decision-making with respect to sexual behaviours.

•

Prenatal genetic testing and fertility treatments: this is another significant body
of research (for example, van Balen, 1997; Anderson, 1998; Sandelowski and
Jones, 1996; Browner and Preloran, 1999; Kenen et al., 2000). Almost all of it is
descriptive, often retrospective, work and has typically been carried out with the
purpose of informing good practice in counselling and information provision. In
some cases, the male partner is cast in a supportive role as opposed to being
seen as a joint player in the decision process. Interestingly (based on the
outputs from the searches we conducted) there appears to be an absence of
work on conflict reflecting, perhaps, that the research has captured the final
decision and couples’ feelings about and justifications for the decision, as
opposed to exploring the decision process itself.

•

Work/life balance and location: recent years has seen a growth of research in
the way couples negotiate where they live and how they manage their work and
family obligations. Within this body of work, decisions are sometimes
‘rebranded’ as compromises and research has tracked the way compromises
are developed and achieved (for example, Challiol and Mignonac, 2005;
Hardhill, 2002). Work in this area has also highlighted the emotional aspects of
the decisions being made and the fact that, typically, other parties are involved
in the decision-making process (for example, Adams, 2004).

•

Consumer behaviour: over the years there has been quite a lot of research
looking at how couples go about making purchasing decisions. This has been
explored both with respect to low cost (for example, restaurants/films) as well
as higher cost (cars, houses) decisions. Some of the findings from this work
would be appear to be relevant to our programme of work. Early work identified
specialisation within couples with regard to purchasing decisions, depending on
what was being purchased. Thus respective roles played in purchasing
decisions were classified as husband dominant, wife dominant, syncratic (or
shared), or autonomic. Davis and Rigaux (1974) refined this further by looking
at marital roles at different phases of the decision-making process (that is,
problem recognition, search for information, and final decision). They found that
both men and women perceived their roles in the decision-making process to
have been more specialised during the information-seeking stage, compared to
the stages when a decision problem is first identified and when the final
decision is taken. Thus, one partner might take the lead role (perhaps on the

52

basis of fore-knowledge, previous experience or availability of resources such
as time) in refining the decision problem and collecting relevant information, but
the actual decision is a shared one. More recent research has highlighted the
cultural influences on decision-making roles. For example, husband dominance
in decision-making prevails to a greater extent in less egalitarian societies
(Green and Cunningham, 1980; Ford et al., 1995).
•

Naturalistic research: Kirchler et al., (2001) used the daily diary entries of 40
couples written over the course of a year and retrospective interviews to explore
joint decision-making in everyday family life. They observed the process of
decision-making by couples as being typically incremental: ‘Partners move
repeatedly from a desire, via discussions and evaluations, postponement and
renewed discussion of a topic, to arrive at a decision. Sometimes, in the course
of reaching a decision, one goal becomes lost in favour of another one’ (p.235).
What is interesting is that, when interviewed, the participants’ descriptions of
the decision process was much more simple and linear and they did not recount
the deviations and circuitous routes by which the decision was achieved. In
addition, they found differences between partners’ accounts of a decision
process.

Kirchler et al. (2001) also paint a vivid picture of decision-making in the context of
everyday routines and activities. Couples reported that discussions (or arguments)
about impending decisions typically took place in the course of carrying out everyday
routines and activities (as opposed to discussions only taking place at a fixed or
particular time/place and isolated from other aspects of family life). In addition a
number of issues were typically being decided on during the same time period.
They conclude: ‘Decisions are not isolated events, but are bound up in the
complexities of everyday life. Whilst a financial decision is being taken, various other
differences of opinion are also being played out, and other everyday tasks
repeatedly force their way to the forefront of discussions’ (p.229). In addition, Kirchler
et al. describe the concurrent (and sometimes conflicting) goals of wanting to
achieve a particular outcome from a decision problem and wanting to achieve a
decision that will preserve the relationship. Thus there are short and longer term
goals of decision-making.
Kirchler et al’s. findings support the idea that specialist knowledge or a relative
interest in a particular topic influences the level of influence each partner brings to a
decision situation. However, Kirchler et al. also found that the views or desires of the
less influential partner can prevail where the decision relates to something of special
importance to them. In addition, Kirchler et al. also found that past decisions could, in
situations of conflict or an incongruence of views, affect the decision taken. They
found what could be described as ‘turn-taking’ in who had the final say over a
decision. This was interpreted by Kirchler et al. as a means by which equality within
the relationship was maintained over time.
53

Implications for the panel study
This is a fascinating area but, as yet, unlinked to theories of decision-making.
However, there are clear links between the findings of the research reported above
and the aspects of some of the decision theories we have described earlier (for
example, the information processing approach and prospect theory).
The way the relationship itself becomes an important player (in a number of different
ways) in the decision-making process is interesting and we need to make sure our
topic guides and analysis allow for that to be properly explored. The research also
flags up the fact that individuals’ accounts of the same decision process may differ –
perhaps a framing effect? We need to make sure our analytic approach can ‘cope’
with that.
The longitudinal nature of the project would allow us to explore the phenomenon of
‘turn-taking’ in decisions, changes and evolutions in what people have vested in their
relationships, and how that affects decision-making.
The issue of dominance/specialisation in the information-seeking phase of decision
making is interesting. The sorts of questions we might want to ask are: What
happens when the person previously dominant in certain decision areas (for example,
finances) is no longer able to/or is no longer around to lead on those decisions –
what does the partner do, is the ‘quality’ of the decision-making jeopardised? Do
other family members move in – perhaps those who specialise in that area within
their own marriage/partnership (for example, the son, who leads in financial decisionmaking in his own marriage/partnership, taking over financial decision-making for
parents after his father’s severe stroke). A different set of questions would be: why,
with respect to what sorts of decisions, and how, is dominance/specialism developed
or assumed when a couple encounters an issue which is totally novel/new to their
relationship (for example, medical treatment, entry to residential care)?
Finally, it is important to note Kirchler et al’s. finding that recollections of a decisionprocess do not accurately reflect the actual process – we need to get behind the
simplistic accounts and this requires finding ways of facilitating people to recall more
accurately the decision process they went through.

54

Appendix:

Identifying the Literature

A search on the PsycInfo biographic database, using terms 'choice' and 'decision
making', but restricted to humans and English language and publications from 1985
onwards, identified over 55,000 publications. An initial scan of these references
showed that it would be difficult to realistically limit the search using conventional
literature search and review strategies. We then met with Dr Dawn Dowding from the
University of York’s Department of Health Sciences whose field of expertise is
theories of decision-making. She confirmed that this field is not one where a
literature search of the conventional type is likely to be the best way to identify the
key theories and the empirical literature supporting them. Much of the literature is in
the form of books, as our initial search had shown (PsycInfo lists books and chapters
as well as journal articles). Dr Dowding pointed us in the direction of the main
theories and key texts and authors. In addition, we identified a scoping review of
patient choice recently carried out for the NHS Service Development and
Organisation (SDO) Research and Development programme (Fotacki et al., 2005).
As part of this review, the authors also carried out a comprehensive search on
theories of choice. Their results and the results of our reading of key texts concur in
identifying the key theories relevant to decision-making and choice within the context
of the Panel Study. We then read and summarised these and identified topics for
further, more focused, searches. We also traced relevant empirical evidence related
to these theories.
In addition, using PsycInfo, we carried out specific searches of the literature for
research on the following topics which are pertinent to the Panel Study:
•
the impact of emotion on choice/decision-making
•
shared choice/decision-making
•
cognitive capacity and choice/decision-making
•
personality and choice/decision-making
•
surrogate choice/decision-making
•
parent choice/decision-making.

55

56

References
Adams, J. (2004) ‘This Is Not Where I Belong!’ The emotional, ongoing and
collective Aspects of Couple’s Decision Making about where to live. Journal of
Comparative Family Studies, 35, 3, 459-484.
Ajzen, I. and Fishbein, M. (1980) Understanding Attitudes and Predicting Social
Behaviour. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Ajzen, I. (1988) Attitudes, Personality and Behaviour. Buckingham: Open University
Press.
Allen, R.S. and Shuster, J.L. (2002) The role of proxies in treatment decisions:
evaluating functional capacity to consent to end-of-life treatments within a family
context. Behavioral Sciences and the Law, 20, 235-252.
Anderson, C.J. (2003) The psychology of doing nothing: forms of decision avoidance
result from reason and emotion. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 139-167.
Anderson, G. (1998) Creating moral space in prenatal genetic services. Qualitative
Health Research, 8, 2, 168-187.
Arkes, H. and Blumer, C. (1985) The psychology of sunk cost. Organisational
Behaviour and Human Decision Processes, 35, 1, 124-140.
Armitage, C.J. and Connor, M. (2001) Efficacy of the theory of planned behaviour: a
meta-analytic review. British Journal of Social Psychology, 40, 471-499.
Bargh, J.A. and Chartrand, T.L. (1999) The unbearable automaticity of being.
American Psychologist, 54, 462-479.
Beach, L.R. and Mitchell, T.R. (1978) A contingency model for the selection of
decision strategies. Academy of Management Review, 3, 439-449.
Beattie, J., Baron, J., Hershey, J.C. and Spranca, M.D. (1994) Psychological
determinants of decision attitude. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 7, 129-144.
Behara, A. (2004) The role of emotion in decision making: evidence from
neurological patients with orbitofrontal damage. Brain and Cognition, 55, 30-40.
Bengston, V. and Kupyers, J. (1971) Generational difference and the developmental
stake. Aging and Human Development, 2, 249-260.

57

Bennett, P. and Murphy, S. (1997) Psychology and Health Promotion. Buckingham:
Open University Press.
Beresford, B. and Sloper, P. (2003) Chronically ill adolescents' experiences of
communicating with doctors: a qualitative study. Journal of Adolescent Health, 33,
172-179.
Bettman, J.R., Luce, M.F. and Payne, J.W. (1998) Constructive consumer choice
processes. Journal of Consumer Research, 25, 187-217.
Bodenhausen, G.V. (1993) Emotions, arousal and stereotypic judgements: a
heuristic model of affect and stereotyping, in D.M. Mackie and D.L. Hamilton (eds),
Affect, Cognition and Stereotyping: Interactive processes in group perception,
Academic Press, San Diego, CA, pp. 13-38.
Bradbury, E.T., Kay, S.P.J., Tighe, C. and Hewison, J. (1994) Decision-making by
parents and children in paediatric hand surgery. British Journal of Plastic Surgery, 47,
324-330.
Brand, M., Labudda, K., Kalbe, K., Hilker, R., Emmans, D., Fuchs, G., Kessler, J.
and Markowitsch, H. (2004) Decision-making impairments in patients with
Parkinson’s disease. Behavioural Neurology, 15, 77-85.
Broder, A. (2003) Decision making with the "adaptive toolbox": influence of
environmental structure, intelligence and working memory load. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 29: 611-625.
Browner, C.H. and Preloran, H. (1999) Male partners’ role in Latinas amniocentesis
decisions. Journal of Genetic Counselling, 8, 2, 85-108.
Carmon, Z., Wertenbroch, K. and Zeelenberg, M. (2003) Option attachment: when
deliberating makes choosing feel like losing. Journal of Consumer Research, 30,
3,15-29.
Cavet, J. and Sloper, P. (2004a) The participation of children and young people in
decisions about UK service development. Child: Care, Health and Development, 30,
613-621.
Cavet, J. and Sloper, P. (2004b) Participation of disabled children in individual
decisions about their lives and in public decisions about service development.
Children and Society, 18, 278-290.
Challiol, H. and Mignonac, K. (2005) Journal of Organizational Behaviour, 26, 3, 247274.
58

Cicirelli, V. (2006) Caregiving decision making by older mothers and adult children:
process and expected outcome. Psychology and Aging, 21, 2, 209-211.
Clack, G.B., Allen, J., Cooper, D. and Head, J.O. (2004) Personality differences
between doctors and their patients: implications for the teaching of communication
skills. Medical Education, 38, 2, 177-186.
Clark, J.A., Wray, N.P. and Ashton, C.M. (2001) Living with treatment decisions:
regrets and quality of life among men treated for metastatic prostrate cancer. Journal
of Clinical Oncology, 19: 72-80.
Cobos, P.L., Almaraz, J. and Garcia-Madruga, J.A. (2003) An associative framework
for probability judgement: an application to biases. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 29, 80-96.
Connolly, T. and Butler, D. (2006) Regret in economic and psychological theories of
choice. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 19, 139-154.
Conolly, T. and Reb, J. (2005) Regret in cancer-related decisions. Health
Psychology, 24, S29-S34.
Connolly, T. and Zeelenberg, M. (2002) Regret in decision making. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 11, 212-216.
Cummins, R. (2002) Proxy responding for subjective well-being: a review, in N. Ellis,
N. Bray and L. Gidden (eds), International Review of Research in Mental Retardation,
Academic Press, San Diego.
Damasio, A.R. (1994) Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason and the Human Brain,
Avon Books, New York.
Daniel, E., Kent, G., Binney, V. and Paglin, J. (2005) Trying to do my best as a
mother: decision-making in families of children undergoing elective surgical
treatment for short stature. British Journal of Health Psychology, 10, 101-114.
Davidson, R. (1998) Affective style and affective disorders: perspectives from
neuroscience. Cognition and Emotion, 12: 307-330.
Davis, H. and Rigaux, B.P. (1974) Perception of marital roles in decision processes.
Journal of Consumer Research, 1, 51-62.
Denburg, N., Tranel, D. and Bechara, A. (2005) The ability to decide advantageously
declines prematurely in some normal older persons. Neuropsychologia, 43, 10991106.
59

Department of Health/Department for Education and Skills (2004) National Service
Framework for Children, Young People and Maternity Services: Core Standards.
Department of Health, London.
Dhami, M.K. (2003) Psychological models of professional decision-making.
Psychological Science, 14, 175-180.
Dhami, M.K. and Harries, C. (2001) Fast and frugal versus regression models in
human judgement, Thinking and Reasoning, 7, 5-27.
Dijksterhuis, A. (2004) Think different: the merits of unconscious thought in
preference development and decision making, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 87, 586-598.
Eisenberg, N., Fabes, RA., Shepard, SA., Murphy, BC., Guthrie, IK., Jones, S. et al.
(1997) Contemporaneous and longitudinal prediction of children’s social functioning
from regulation and emotionality. Child Development, 68: 642-664.
Ettenson, R., Shanteau, J. and Krogstad, J. (1987) Expert judgement: is more
information better? Psychological Reports, 60, 227-238.
Fagerlin, A., Ditto, P.H., Danks, J.H., Houts, R.M. and Smucker, W.D. (2001)
Projection in surrogate decisions about life-sustaining medical treatments. Health
Psychology, 20, 166-175.
Fellows, L. (2004) The Cognitive Neuroscience of human decision-making: a review
and conceptual framework. Behavioural and Cognitive Neurosciences Reviews, 3,
159-172.
Fellows, L. and Farah, M. (2005) Different underlying impairments in decisionmaking following ventromedial and dorsolateral frontal lobe damage in humans.
Cerebral Cortex, 15, 58-63.
Fingerman, K. (2001) Aging Mothers and Their Adult Children: A study in mixed
emotions. Springer, New York.
Finucane, M., Peters, E. and Slovic, P. (2003) Judgement and decision making: the
dance of affect and reason, in S.L. Scheider and J. Shanteau (eds), Emerging
Perspectives on Judgement and Decision Research, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp. 327-364.

60

Fischer, J.E., Steiner, F., Zucol, F., Berger, C., Martignon, L., Bossart, W. et al.
(2002) Use of simple heuristics to target macrolide prescription in children with
community-acquired pneumonia, Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine,
156, 1005-1008.
Folkman, S. (1984) Personal control and stress and coping processes: a theoretical
analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 839-852.
Folkman, S. and Lazarus, R. (1988) Coping as a mediator of emotion. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 466-475.
Ford, J.B., LaTour, M. and Henthorne, T.L. (1995) Perception of marital roles in
purchase decision processes: a cross-cultural study. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 23, 2, 120-131.
Fotaki, M., Boyd, A., Smith, L., McDonald, R., Roland, M., Sheaff, R., Edwards, A.
and Elwyn, G. (2005) Patient Choice and the Organisation and Delivery of Health
Services: Scoping Review. http://www.sdo.lshtm.ac.uk/files/project/80-final-report.pdf
(26 November 2007).
Friedman, M. and Savage, L.J. (1848) The utility analysis of choices involving risk.
Journal of Political Economy, 56, 279-304.
Fulmer, K.A. (1997) Parents’ decision-making strategies when selecting child care:
effects of parental awareness, experience, and education. Child and Youth Care
Forum, 26, 391-409.
Gasper, K. and Clore, G.L. (1998) The persistent use of negative affect by anxious
individuals to estimate risk. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 13501363.
Gigerenzer, G. (2004) Fast and frugal heuristics: the tools of bounded rationality, in
D.J. Koehler and N. Harvey (eds), Blackwell Handbook of Judgement and Decision
Making, Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 62-88.
Gilbert, D.T. and Gill, M.J. (2000) The momentary realist. Psychological Science, 11,
394-398.
Gilovich, T. and Medvec, V.H. (1995) The experience of regret: what, when and why.
Psychological Review, 102, 379-395.
Godin, G. and Kok, G. (1996) The theory of planned behaviour: a review of its
applications to health related behaviour. American Journal of Health Promotion, 11,
87-97.

61

Godwin, D. and Scanzoni, J. (1989) Couple consensus during marital joint decisionmaking: a context, process, outcome model. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 51,
943-956.
Goldstein, D.G. and Gigerenzer, G. (2002) Models of ecological rationality: the
recognition heuristic. Psychological Review, 109, 75-90.
Gonzalez, C., Thomas, R. and Vanyukov, P. (2005) The relationships between
cognitive ability and dynamic decision-making. Intelligence, 33, 2, 169-186.
Gray, J.R. (1999) A bias toward short-term thinking in threat-related negative
emotional states. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 65-75.
Green, L. and Mehr, D.R. (1997) What alters physicians' decisions to admit to the
coronary care unit? The Journal of Family Practice, 45, 291-226.
Green, R. and Cunningham, I. (1980) Family purchasing roles in two countries.
Journal of International Business Studies, 11, 1, 92-96.
Guerriere, D.N., McKeever, P., Llewellyn-Thomas, H. and Berall, G. (2003) Mothers’
decisions about gastrostomy tube insertion in children: factors contributing to
uncertainty. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 45, 470-476.
Gustafson, K.E., McNamara, J.R. and Jensen, J.A. (1994) Parents’ informed consent
decisions regarding psychotherapy for children: consideration of therapeutic risks
and benefits. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 25. 16-22.
Hammond, K.R. (1996) Human Judgement and Social Policy: Irreducible uncertainty,
inevitable error, unavoidable justice, Oxford University Press, New York.
Hancock, P.A. and Warm, J.S. (1989) A dynamic model of stress and sustained
attention, Human Factors, 31, 519-537.
Hardhill, I. (2002) Gender, Migration and Dual-Career Households.
Harris, J. (2003) Time to make up your mind: why choosing is difficult. British Journal
of Learning Disabilities, 31, 3-8.
Harvey, N. and Fischer, I. (1997) Taking advice: accepting help, improving
judgement and sharing responsibilities. Organizational Behaviour and Human
Decision Processes, 70, 117-133.
Harvey, N., Harries, C. and Fischer, I. (2000) Using advice and assessing its quality.
Organisational Behaviour and Human Decision Processes, 81, 252-273.

62

Hastie, R. and Dawes, R.J. (2001) Rational Choice in an Uncertain World: The
psychology of judgement and decision making. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA, US.
Hogarth, R.M. (2001) Educating Intuition. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Helson, R. and Klohnen, E.C. (1998) Affective coloring of personality from young
adulthood to midlife. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 241-252.
Higgins, S.S. and Kayser-Jones, J. (1996) Factors influencing parent decision
making about pediatric cardiac transplantation. Journal of Pediatric Nursing, 11, 152160.
Hiltunen, E.F., Medich, C., Chase, S., Peterson, L. and Forrow, L. (1999) Familydecision-making for end-of-life treatment: the SUPPORT nurse narratives. Study to
understand prognoses and preferences for outcomes and risks of treatment. Journal
of Clinical Ethics, 10, 126-134.
Hinds, P.S., Oakes, L., Furman, W., Foppiano, P., Olson, MS., Quargnenti, A.,
Gattuso, J., Powell, B., Srivastava, D.K., Jawawardene, D., Sandlund, J.T. and
Strong, C. (1997) Decision making by parents and healthcare professionals when
considering continued care for pediatric patients with cancer. Oncology Nursing
Forum, 24, 1523-1528.
Hirst, M. and Baldwin, S (1994) Unequal opportunities: growing up disabled. HMSO,
London, UK.
Hopp, F.P. and Duffy, S.A. (2000) Racial variations in end-of-life care. Journal of the
American Geriatrics Society, 48, 658-663.
Iyengar, S.S. and Lepper, M.R. (2000) When choice is demotivating: can one desire
too much of a good thing? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 9951006.
Jungermann, H. and Fischer, K. (2005) Using expertise and experience for giving
and taking advice, in T. Betsch, and S. Haberstroh (eds), The Routines and Decision
Making, Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah.
Kahnemann, D. (2000) Prefaces to choices, values and frames, in D. Kahnemann
and A. Tversky (eds), Choices, Values and Frames, Russell Sage Foundation and
Cambridge University Press, New York.
Kahnemann, D. and Frederick, S. (2002) Representativeness revisited: attribute
substitution in intuitive judgement, in T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, and D. Kahenmann (eds),
Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgements, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
63

Kahnemann, D. and Tversky, A. (1979) Prospect theory: an analysis of decision
under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263-291.
Kahneman, D. and Tversky, A. (1982) The psychology of preferences. Scientific
American, 246, 160-173.
Kenen, R., Smith, A.C., Watkins, C., Zuber-Pittore, C. (2000) To use or not to use:
male partners’ perspectives on decision-making about prenatal diagnosis. Journal of
Genetic Counselling, 9, 1, 33-45.
Kenny, D. and Aticelli, L. (1989) The role of the relationship in marital decisionmaking, in D. Brinberg and J. Jaccard (eds), Dyadic Decision-Making, SpringerVerlag, New York.
King, G.A., Zwaigenbaum, L., King, S., Rosenbaum, P. and Bates, A. (2006) A
qualitative investigation of changes in the belief system of families of children with
autism or Down syndrome. Child: Care, Health and Development, 32, 353-369.
Kirchler, E., Rodler, C., Holzl, E. and Meier, K. (2001) Conflict and Decision-Making
in Close Relationships: love, money and daily routines. European Monographs in
Social Psychology. Psychology Press, Hove.
Kirschbaum, M.S. (1996) Life support decisions for children: what do parents value
most? Advanced Nursing Science, 19, 51-71.
Knetsch, J. (1989) The endowment effect and the evidence of nonreversible
indifference curves. American Economic Review, 79, 1277-84.
Knight, F.H. (1921) Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit. Houghton Mifflin, New York.
Lazarus, R.S. (1991) Emotion and Adaptation. Oxford University Press, New York.
Ko, N. and Muecke, M. (2005) Reproductive decision-making among HIV positive
couples in Taiwan. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 37, 1, 41-47.
Lancioni, G.E., O’Reilly, M. F. and Emerson, E. (1996) A review of choice research
with people with severe and profound developmental disabilities. Research in
Developmental Disabilities, 17, 5, 391-411.
Lemerise, E.A. and Arsenio, W.F. (2000) An integrated model of emotion processes
and cognition in social information processing. Child Development, 71, 107-118.
Lerner, J.S., Goldberg, J.H. and Tetlock, P.E. (1998) Sober second thought: the
effects of accountability, anger and authoritarianism on attributions of responsibility.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 563-574.
64

Lerner, J.S. and Keltner, D. (2000) Beyond valence: toward a model of emotionspecific influences on judgement and choice. Cognition and Emotion, 14, 473-493.
Lerner, J.S., and Tetlock, P.E. (1999) Accounting for the effects of accountability.
Psychological Bulletin, 125, 255-275.
Lerner, J.S. and Tiedens, L.Z. (2006) Portrait of the angry decision maker: how
appraisal tendencies shape anger's influence on cognition. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 19, 115-137.
Lester, P., Chesney, M., Cooke, M., Whalley, P., Perez, B., Petru, A., Dorenbaum, A.
and Wara, D. (2002) Diagnostic disclosure to HIV-infected children: how parents
decide when and what to tell. Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 7, 85-99.
Levin, I. (1987) Associative effects of information framing. Bulletin of Psychonomics
Society, 25, 85-86.
Luce, M.F. (1998) Choosing to avoid: coping with negatively emotion-laden
consumer decisions. Journal of Consumer Research, 24, 409-433.
Luce, M. (2005) Decision making as coping. Health Psychology, 24, S23-S28.
March, J. (1994) A Primer on Decision-Making: how decisions happen. Free Press,
New York.
McDaniels, T.L., Axelrod, L.J., Cavanagh, N.S. and Slovic, P. (1997) Perception of
ecological risk to water environments. Risk Analysis, 17, 341-352.
Mellers, B., Schwatrz, A. and Ritov, I. (1999) Emotion-based choice. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 128, 332-345.
Mental Capacity Act (2005) The Stationery Office Limited, London.
Miller, G.A. (1956) Information theory. Scientific American, 195, 42-46.
Miller, J.R. et al. (1990) Ventilator dependency: decision making, daily functioning
and quality of life for patients with muscular dystrophy. Developmental Medicine and
Child Neurology, 32, 1078-1086.
Miller, W.B. and Pasta, D. (2001) Motivational antecedents to contraceptive method
change following a pregnancy scare: a couple analysis. Social Biology, 48, 256-277.
Mitchell, W. and Sloper, P. (2001) User-friendly Information for Families with
Disabled Children. York Publishing, York.
65

Newell, B.R., Weston, N.J. and Shanks, D.R. (2003) Empirical tests of a fast-andfrugal heuristic: not everyone "takes-the-best". Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 91, 82-96.
Newell, BR. and Shanks, DR. (2003) Take-the-best or look at the rest? Factors
influencing 'one reason' decision making. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 29, 53-65.
Oehler, A. (1995) The Explanation of Private Investigators’ Behaviour. Schaffer
Poeschel Verlag, Stuttgart.
Over, D. (2004) Rationality and the normative/descriptive distinction, in D.J. Koehler
and N. Harvey (eds), Blackwell Handbook of Judgement and Decision Making,
Blackwell, Oxford pp. 3-18.
Payne, J.W. (1976) Task complexity and contingent processing in decision making:
an information search and protocol analysis. Organization Behavior and Human
Performance, 16, 366-387.
Payne, J.W. and Bettman, J.R (2004) Walking with the scarecrow: the informationprocessing approach to decision research, in D.J. Koehler and N. Harvey (eds),
Blackwell Handbook of Judgement and Decision-Making, Blackwell, Oxford pp.110132).
Peters, E., Vastfjall, D., Garling, T. and Slovic, P. (2006) Affect and decision making:
a "hot" topic. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 19, 79-85.
Peters, E., Vastfjall, D., Slovic, P., Mertz, C., Mazzocco, K. and Dickert, S. (2006)
Numeracy and decision-making. Psychological Science, 17, 5, 407-413.
Poole, M. and Billingsley, J. (1989) The structuring of dyadic decisions, in D.
Brinberg and J. Jaccard (eds), Dyadic Decision-Making. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Read, D., Loewenstein, G. and Rabin, M. (1999) Choice bracketing. Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty, 19, 171-197.
Ruccione, K., Kramer, R.F., Moore, I.K. and Perin, G. (1991) Informed consent for
treatment of childhood cancer: factors affecting parents’ decision making. Journal of
Pediatric Oncology Nursing, 8, 112-121.
Sandelowski, M. and Jones, L.C. (1996) ‘Healing Fictions’: stories of choosing in the
aftermath of the detection of foetal abnormalities. Social Science and Medicine, 42, 3,
353-361.

66

Savage, L. (1954) The Foundations of Statistics. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Schepis, M., Reid, D. and Behrman, M. (1996) Acquisition and functional use of
voice output communication by persons with profound multiple disabilities. Behaviour
Modification, 20, 451-468.
Schoemaker, P. and Russo, J. (2001) Managing frames to make better decisions, in
S. Hoch and H. Kunreuther (eds), Wharton on Making Decisions, John Wiley and
Sons, New York.
Schwartz, B. (2004) The Paradox of Choice. Harper Collins, New York.
Schwartz, B., Ward, A., Monterosso, J., Lyubomirsky, S., White, K. and Lehman, D.R.
(2002) Maximizing versus satisficing: happiness is a matter of choice. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 1178-1197.
Schwartz, N. (2000) Emotion, cognition and decision making. Cognition and Emotion,
14, 433-440.
Scott, A. (2002) Identifying and analysing dominant preferences in discrete choice
experiments: an application in health care. Journal of Economic Psychology, 23,
383-398.
Shalowitz, D.I, Garrett-Mayer, E. and Wendler, D. (2006) The accuracy of surrogate
decision makers: a systematic review. Archives of Internal Medicine, 166, 493-497.
Shanteau, J. (1992) How much information does an expert use? Is it relevant? Acta
Psychologica, 81, 75-86.
Sillars, A. and Kahlbesch, P. (1989) Implicit and explicit decision-making styles in
couples, in D. Brinberg and J. Jaccard (eds), Dyadic Decision-Making. SpringerVerlag, New York.
Simon, H.A. (1955) A behavioural model of rational choice. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 69, 99-118.
Simon, H.A. (1957) Models of Man: Social and rational. Wiley, New York.
Simon, H.A. (1983) Reason in Human Affairs. Stanford University Press, Stanford,
CA.
Simonson, I. (1992) The influence of anticipating regret and responsibility on
purchasing decisions. Journal of Consumer Research, 19, 105-118.

67

Sloman, S.A. (1996) The empirical case for two systems of reasoning. Psychological
Bulletin, 119, 3-22.
Sloper, P. (1996) Needs and responses of parents following the diagnosis of
childhood cancer. Child: Care, Health and Development, 22, 187-202.
Slovic, P. (1987) Perception of risk. Science, 236, 280-285.
Slovic, P., Finucane, M., Peters, E. and MaGregor, D.G. (2002) The affect heuristic,
in T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, and D. Kahnemann (eds), Heuristics and Biases: The
Psychology of Intuitive Judgement, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp.397420.
Sniezek, J. and Buckley, T. (1995) Cueing and cognitive conflict in judge-advisor
decision making. Organisational Behaviour and Human Decision Processes, 62,
159-174.
Soman, D. (2004) Framing, loss aversion and mental accounting, in D.J. Koehler
and N. Harvey (eds), Blackwell Handbook of Judgement and Decision Making,
Blackwell Publishing, Malden.
Stout, J., Rodawalt, W. and Siemers, E. (2001) Risky decision making in
Huntington’s disease. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 7, 92101.
Stroup, S., Appelbaum, P., Swartz, M., Mukesh, P. et al. (2005) Decision-making
capacity for research participation among individuals in the CATIE schizophrenia trial.
Schizophrenia Research, 80, 1, 1-8.
Summers, J.A., Behr, S.K., and Turnbull, A.P. (1989) Positive adaptation and coping
strengths of families who have children with disabilities, in G.H.S. Singer and L.K.
Irvin, Support for Caregiving Families: Enabling positive adaptations to disability, pp.
27-40. Paul Brookes, Baltimore.
Suto, W., Clare, I., Holland, H. and Watson, P. (2005) Capacity to make decisions
among people with mild intellectual disabilities. Journal of Intellectual Disability
Research, 49, 3, 199-209.
Svenson, O. (2003) Values, affect and processes in human decision making: A
differentiation and consolidation theory perspective, in S.L. Scheider, and J.
Shanteau (eds), Emerging Perspectives on Judgement and Decision Research.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 287-326.

68

Tetlock, P.E. (2002) Social functionalist frameworks for judgement and choice:
intuitive policians, theologians and prosecutors. Psychological Review, 109, 451-471.
Thaler, R. (1980) Toward a positive theory of consumer choice. Journal of Economic
Behaviour and Organization, 1, 39-60.
Tiedens, L.Z. and Linton, S. (2001) Judgement under emotional certainty and
uncertainty: the effects of specific emotions on information processing. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 973-988.
Tversky, A. (1972) Elimination by aspects: a theory of choice. Psychological Review.
79, 281-299.
Tversky, A. and Kahnemann, D. (1981) The framing of decisions and the psychology
of choice. Science, 211, 4481, 453-458.
Tversky, A. and Kahnemann, D. (1992) Advances in prospect theory: cumulative
representation of subjective probability. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297-323.
Van Balen, F., Verdurmen, J., Ketting, E. (1997) Choices and motivations of infertile
couples. Patient Education and Counseling, 31, 1, 19-27.
Von Neumann, J. and Morgenstern, O. (1947) Theory of Games and Economic
Behaviour. (2nd edition), Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Ware, J. (2004) Ascertaining the views of people with profound and multiple learning
disabilities. British Journal of Learning Disabilities, 32, 175-179.
de Wit, J. and Stroebe, W. (2004) Social cognition models of health behaviour, in A.
Kaptein, and J. Weinmann (eds), Health Psychology, British Psychological Society
and Blackwell Publishing, Oxford, pp. 52-83.
Wroe, A.L., Turner, N. and Salkovis, P.M. (2004) Understanding and predicting
parental decisions about early childhood immunizations. Health Psychology, 23, 3341.
Wu, G., Zhang, J. and Gonzalez, R. (2004) Decision under risk, in D.J. Koehler and
N. Harvey (eds), Blackwell Handbook of Judgement and Decision Making, Blackwell
Publishing, Malden.
Zajonc, R.B. (1980) Feeling and thinking: preferences need now inferences.
American Psychologist, 35, 151-175.

69

Zak, A., Collins, C., Harper, L. and Masher, M. (1998) Self-reported control over
decision-making and its relationship to intimate relationships. Psychological Reports,
82, 2, 560-562.
Zeelenberg, M. (1999) Anticipated regret, expected feedback and behavioral
decision making. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 12, 93-106.

70

