Series
ISSN: 2601 – 2510 | e-ISSN: 2601 – 2529

2020, Volume 14, International Conference Innovative Business Management & Global
Entrepreneurship (IBMAGE 2020), pages: 661-669 |
https://doi.org/10.18662/lumproc/ibmage2020/48

Methods,
Techniques and
Sales Strategies
Cristina Gabriela VASCIUC
(SĂNDULESCU)1*,
Dumitru SĂNDULESCU2
Otilia CRĂCIUN (RADU)3
Valahia University of Târgoviște,
Romania, crisabebe2005@yahoo.com
* Corresponding Author
2 Valahia University of Târgoviște,
Romania, miti.sandulescu@yahoo.com
3 Valahia University of Târgoviște,
Romania, România,
otilia_radu@yahoo.com
1

Abstract: The economic life implies the existence of the actors who
have to satisfy their own needs, expectations, this presupposing the
appearance of the choices that they must make from the multitude
of products or services on the market.
Since ancient times, the sale has been made for a better living, so
Thales is the first wise, Solon the second founder of Athens and the
mathematician Hippocrates, who were traders. Plato, the divine,
sold oil, and Baruch Spinoza, philosopher, polished mirrors.
Therefore, sales forces play an important role, which, through their
strategies, can make a significant contribution to achieving the
general and specific objectives. The art of selling tips the balance of
success and failure, the relationship between the seller and the client,
ending with win-win situation for both parties.
Keywords: Sales; goods production; organization; profit; strategies.
How to cite: Vasciuc (Săndulescu), C.G., Săndulescu, D., &
Crăciun (Radu), O. (2020). Methods, Techniques and Sales
Strategies. In M. W. Staniewski, V. Vasile, & A. Grigorescu
(vol. ed.), Lumen Proceedings: Vol. 14. International Conference
Innovative Business Management & Global Entrepreneurship
(IBMAGE 2020) (pp. 661-669). Iasi, Romania: LUMEN
Publishing House.
https://doi.org/10.18662/lumproc/ibmage2020/48

© The Authors, LUMEN Conference Center & LUMEN Proceedings.

Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the Organizing Committee of the International Conference Innovative Business
Management & Global Entrepreneurship (IBMAGE 2020), September 4th, 2020, Warsaw, Poland

Lumen Proceedings 14 | International Conference IBMAGE 2020
1. Introduction
Sales strategies, as subordinated marketing strategies, are challenging
for the organization, but especially for those who adopt them within it. This
implies identifying the demand segment according to the company's offer,
but above all emphasizing the product or service qualities offered by sales
agents who need to be trained to achieve the expected results. Sales force
must apply appropriate strategies for each client, without misleading the
client.
Thus, the purpose of marketing strategies is to determine customers
to buy products or services offered by the company through determined,
persistent, optimistic, experienced, experienced sales agents. Customers are
looking for products or services that promise the highest quality, high degree
of innovation, so companies should permanently improve their
manufacturing process and necessarily the product itself, hence the productoriented concept. At the same time, there is another option, that of sales
orientation, which focuses products or services without search too much, in
this case, clients need to be identified and convinced to buy their benefits.
2. Sales lead the business
Any business has a central core which is the idea of selling. The
ability to sell all sorts of goods, products and services is essential for any
business and of course it implies the idea of selling yourself. As a sales agent
in business, the business must be visible. You become the expert who meets
the needs and wishes of your customers.
The art of selling implies discovering the customer’s needs and wants
and the way that you treat your customers creates a positive impression in
what concerns the business. This way, the customer is provided with a
picture of what he/she wants to purchase and the act of selling will take
place only by implying the ability to properly handle the relation customersalesperson.
For a better selling of the product it is necessary that you hire a
person who has the best qualities for learning everything about the product
that he sells and he is also very good in relating directly or indirectly with the
customer.
Nowadays, the entrepreneurs must take into consideration the
customers’ cultural particularities, their incomes, their jobs and thus making
the selling possible in a very distinct way.
Customer relationships play an essential role in successful sales. Ruth
and Wysoki consider that the selling itself is not as important as the relation
662

Lumen Proceedings 14 | International Conference IBMAGE 2020
developed between the customer and the seller [4]. This is why it is
necessary to gain customer’s trust, this happening through a very close
observation of his expectations, everything expressing through an attentive
listening of what he says. Taking all this into consideration, the way a seller
chooses to communicate with a potential buyer can lead to an excellent
relation with him, increasing the selling and the company’s profits.
Ken Blanchard, co-author of “Raving Fans”, argues the fact that for
having a major advantage in front of the competitors, the seller must take
the customer to the point that he would be much honoured to have their
products and brag about it to their friends [9].

Potential sales
Networking creates potential customers who can help your business
to grow in sales.
Networking will expand contacts to find services that would help
with the business. Two types of networks will improve your sales skills. The
first is the official network where people come from commercial or
professional associations with similar business interests together (such as the
Local Chamber of Commerce) [7]. The second type is the informal network
that involves other people with other companies (such as managers, sellers,
and even competitors).

Steps to close the sale
The negative experiences make the customers feel uncomfortable, a
less experienced seller could even put up some major risks, including the
decreasing of the profit.
There are seven steps to the sales process: prospecting, preparing,
approaching, presenting, addressing objections, closing sales and tracking
[11]:
1. Prospecting – identifying the customers.
2. Preparing – the knowledge you get about a customer after
prospecting .
3. The sales approach – the very important, this way the seller has a
first occasion to make a good impression.
4. Presenting sales – presenting the benefits of the products or
services to the customers to maintain a steady interest.
5. Managing objections or rejection – handling rejections involves
the ability of the seller to foretell possible objections such as: no need, no
hurry to buy, no trust, no money to buy, and no desire to buy.
6. Closing sales – it takes place when the client buys the product,
even if the seller has to use an emotional motivation.
663

Lumen Proceedings 14 | International Conference IBMAGE 2020
7. Finally, the customer must be followed by the seller, even after the
deal was signed.

Sales rules
1. Any business has a central focus - the customer
2. The business needs the customer
3. The business’s goal is relating to the customer
4. For the business, the customer is a stakeholder
5. The business is there for the customer’s needs
6. The business takes into consideration that the customers have
different expectations
7. The business must overcome a customer’s objections
8. The business has obvious advantages if it also offers extra benefits
9. The business must maintain its customers
10. The business exists due to the customer

Sales Strategies
- Selling to current clients = loyalty group towards the company,
creating a positive feedback between them and the company or between
them and the sales agent
- Cross selling strategy = sharing of complementary products of the
same brand. This means inducing the customer's message that he needs all
of those products, helping the seller in the sales process. Applies well on the
service area: printing houses, hotels, restaurants
- The up-selling strategy = convincing the customer to buy a more
expensive product than the one for which he has shown his desire to
purchase. Assumes the salesperson's tactic to ask and learn about customer
needs [1; 12].
Today's businesses have begun to focus on customer relationship
marketing, this assuming the loyalty of existing customers, maintaining longlasting relationships with them, giving them added value and satisfaction.
Due to different preferences and changes in consumer tastes, organizations
come to their satisfaction with complementary products that increase the
desire to purchase, so their satisfaction attracts other customers [2]. At the
same time, the customer loyalty differs greatly depending on the competitive
situation, the influence of the clients' product characteristics being very high,
as well as the changes in the income structure, some of the consumers being
cautious about spending, others with "handshake".
Customer relationship marketing also involves employing those
people trained in product and service knowledge to inform customers about
664

Lumen Proceedings 14 | International Conference IBMAGE 2020
product characteristics, novelty, and significant differences from a similar
product [3].
Seller and customer communication is important, with an influence
on the seller's sales and the customer: the seller will explain to the customer
what he or she knows best about everything and the customer will be
delighted that the communicator is competent, appreciating this, having the
desire to return to the space where he was best informed.
Customers differ in many ways: there are children, adults, elderly
people who have expectations, desires, different needs depending on sex,
occupation, temperament, character, income, ethnicity, so sales forces need
to know to correctly inform in terms of their own offer, correctly identify
customers' expectations and intervene when customers change their tastes
[10].
Organizations are becoming more and more interested in improving
their communication with consumers, contributing significantly to increasing
revenue for organizations, promoting new products on the market, selecting
those consumers interested in the product or service, creating customer
relationships, etc. . On the other hand, customer satisfaction becomes an
opportunity for the company, attracting other potential buyers [14].
Sales strategies are true works of art, especially nowadays, when
customers are increasingly paying attention to how they spend their income,
so long-term relationships with consumers have to be built and they have
always used favourable customer reviews have purchased the company's
products or services [6].
The company's marketing department is the only one that generates
profit, so it has to propose SMART (specific, measurable, applicable,
realistic, and time-limited) goals, see Figure 1 [15].

Source:SMART [15]

Figure 1 SMART goals

665

Lumen Proceedings 14 | International Conference IBMAGE 2020
Sales people should have attitudes, skills, and sales knowledge to
observe the customer's behaviour to discover his needs to interact with it.
Selling the product involves presenting the product's features by
describing its features so that customer demand is secure [5].
"The unilateral sale method requires the seller to focus on product
presentation, insisting on its features, not being interested in the customer's
actual purchasing motives. This method does not allow real exchange of
information, effective communication between the seller and the customer”
[8]
"The bilateral sales method is based on the existence of a flow of
information between the seller and the comparator potential, both partners
being involved in the communication process. Thus, the seller identifies the
buyer's reasons and the customer's needs, subsequently making a
presentation of the product focused on the customer ", see Figure 2 [8].
METHODS

Tasks

Asking
Explore
Discuss

THE CONCEPT OF
SALE
Bilateral Form
(discussing possible
outcomes and
The sales concept that
discrepancies)
is supposed to be done:
"What's
the bigger thing
Results - to sell the
for you?"
product.
What is it?
How does it work?
SELLING THE
PRODUCT
Bilateral form
(discussing product
modes)
"What features are you
looking for?"

Demonstrate
Exploring
Explain
THE CONCEPT OF
SALE
Unilateral (presentation
of benefits) "Allow me
to explain how the
quality will grow"

SELLING THE
PRODUCT
Unilateral (Presentation
of features, traits)
"Let me describe this
aspect"

Source: Robert B. Miller, Stephen E. Heimon, La Venta Conceptual, Ediciones Folio,
Barcelona, 1989, p181 [8]

Figure 2. Planning Matrix

666

Lumen Proceedings 14 | International Conference IBMAGE 2020
3. Methodology of research
Choosing the "Selling Methods, Techniques, and Strategies" is a
challenge for the marketing environment because many of the indigenous
organizations approve this issue only through accelerated sales growth,
profit making, not taking into account the need to generate sales. Now
anything will sell to anybody, however much, thus predominantly an intense
production.
The main purpose of the paper is to identify the sales strategies used
by the companies in the market in order to achieve the general and specific
objectives, which will bring added value and the newcomers to the
marketing companies.
During the work, we used bibliographic sources belonging to the
Romanian and foreign specialized literature, digital library sources and
internet pages, which together with their own experience contributed to the
shaping of aspects of the sales vision.
4. Conclusions
The role of sales is well established within the marketing mix, which
contributes significantly to the objectives of organizations. The sale is based
on a lot of actions such as creating, distributing and even consuming the
good or service. In this respect, the seller is assigned sales techniques that
describe clear and real images of products or services in order to be
purchased by the customer. Thus communication between sales forces and
buyers must materialize in the act of sale-purchase. The art of selling
involves building trust with customers, and sellers need to know the
strengths they can offer. Changes that occur on the market are subordinate
to marketing activities, so their central purpose lies with the customer's
orientation, needs, needs, expectations, these actions leading to maximizing
satisfaction, consumption and why not the quality of life.
Acknowledgement
This work is supported by project POCU 125040, entitled "Development of
the tertiary university education to support the economic growth PROGRESSIO", co-financed by the European Social Fund under the
Human Capital Operational Program 2014-2020

667

Lumen Proceedings 14 | International Conference IBMAGE 2020

References
[1] Alvani S, Azar A, Danaeifard H. Quantitative research methodology in
management: A comprehensive approach, Tehran: Saffar Publication. 2004.
[2] Anderson JC, Narus JA, Wouters M. Tiebreaker selling: How nonstrategic
suppliers can help customers solve important problems. Harvard Business
Review [Internet]. 2014 [cited 2020 Oct 15];92(3). Available from:
https://hbr.org/2014/03/tiebreaker-selling
[3] Bosworth MT. Solution selling: Creating buyers in difficult selling markets. 1st
ed. McGraw-Hill Education; 1994. 224 p.
[4] Creswell JW. Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches. Singapore: Sage publications; 2013. 273 p.
[5] Croitoru G, Radu F, Nitu O, Tileaga C. Ways to Increase the Efficiency of
Recruitment, Selection and Employment Strategies in Large Organizations
from Dambovita County. Risk in Contemporary Economy. Proceedings
conference [Internet]. 2012 [cited 2020 Oct 15];2067:219-224. Available from:
https://ideas.repec.org/a/ddj/fserec/y2012p219-224.html
[6] DeVincentis JR, Rackham N. Breadth of a salesman: But even in the same
industry, different customers see value very differently. McKinsey Quarterly.
1998; p. 32.
[7] Johnson JS. Broadening the application of mixed methods in sales research.
Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management [Internet]. 2015 [cited 2020
Oct 19];35(4):334-345. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1080/08853134.2015.1016953
[8] Miller R B, Heimon SE. La Venta Conceptual. Barcelona: Ediciones Folio;
1989. 181 p.
[9] Nicodim L, Croitoru G, Radu F. Sales Management-Essential Factor for
Contemporary Companies Competitiveness. Economic Sciences Series.
2012;12(1):1052-1055.
[10] Radu V, Florea NV, Radu F, Tabirca AI. Improving Long-Term Relationships
between Organizations and Customers using Marketing Databases and
Simulation Models. Journal of Science and Arts [Internet]. 2020 Apr [cited
2020 Oct 19];20(2):395-418. Available from:
http://www.josa.ro/en/index.html?http%3A//www.josa.ro/en/josa.html
[11] Cashing in on. Business opportunities [Internet]. Southern Rural Development
Center. Available from:
http://srdc.msstate.edu/cashing/files/p2_7_selling.pdf
[12] Moisan A. 4 metode eficiente de creștere a vânzărilor [Internet]. Manager.ro –
Portalul tău de știri [updated 2017 Sep 29; cited 2019 Feb 21]. Available from:
https://www.manager.ro/articole/marketing-18/4-metode-eficiente-decrestere-a-vanzarilor-77377.html

668

Lumen Proceedings 14 | International Conference IBMAGE 2020
[13] Făcăleaţă LI. Perspective ale pieţei româneşti de retail în contextul Europei
2020. Stategii manageriale [Internet] 2015 [cited 2020 Aug 22] Available from:
http://www.strategiimanageriale.ro/article-2015-id-67-revista.nr..2.(28)-393perspective.ale.pietei.romanesti.de.retail..in.contextul.europei.2020.html
[14] Anghel LD, Tehnici de promovare. Note de curs. [Internet]. [cited 25 Mar,
2019] Available from:
http://www.langhel.ase.ro/tehnici%20promotionale%202009.pdf
[15] SMART - Specific Measurable Achievable Realistic Timely [Internet]. Free
Management eBooks, Templates and Checklists. [cited 2020 Aug 19] Available
from http://www.free-management-ebooks.com/faqps/goal-04.htm

669

