#1 Salesforce Analytics

The Definitive Guide to
Data-Driven Sales Forecasting
For Sales VPs and Sales Managers

#1 Salesforce Analytics

Contents
Introduction to Data-Driven Sales Forecasting

4

Barriers to Effective Sales Forecasting

4

Managing Risk and Identifying Opportunity

5

Key Reasons to Use Data-Driven Sales Forecasting

6

6 Simple Steps to a Data-Driven Sales Forecast

6

1. Standardize Your Opportunity Stages

7

2. Know Historical Sales Stage Conversion Rates to Closed-Won

7

3. Define Key Metrics that Drive Your Forecast and Meetings

8

4. Demand Accurate Close Dates and Monitor Close Date Changes

9

5. Know the Historical Accuracy of Your Team’s Forecasts

9

6. Separate Your Pipeline Review vs. Forecasting Meeting

9

How to Prepare for Your Weekly Forecasting Meeting

9

Essential Metrics for Data-Driven Forecasts

10

Overlay Your Data-Driven Forecast with Your Rep’s Intuition

11

Manage Your 10 Forecast Killers

12

Conclusion

13

2

About the Authors
Zorian Rotenberg
Zorian is a sales and marketing veteran with a proven track record of
success in the high-tech world. He has brought his passion for
improving sales performance management with analytics to
InsightSquared. Prior to InsightSquared Zorian was an executive on
the management teams of several global software companies which
he helped to grow by over 100% in annual revenues, ranging
between $8 Million to over $100 Million. He was also CEO at a
software company which grew Americas sales by 145% in his first
year as CEO using the best practices of inside sales management.
Zorian has a degree in Finance and with minors in Applied
Mathematics and in Computer Science from Lehigh University and
earned his MBA from Harvard Business School.

Kim Lindquist
Kim can be found at the crossroads of marketing analytics and
writing. With a passion for data-driven decisions, Kim strives to
turn numbers into stories that help businesses understand their
data-landscape.
Since graduating from Boston College, where she earned degrees in
English and Communication, Kim has enjoyed working in the lively
start-up scene in and around the Boston area.

3

#1 Salesforce Analytics

Introduction to Data-Driven Sales Forecasting
Most companies face challenges with achieving accurate and effective forecasting. They have poor visibility
into their projected sales because of the inaccurate intuition-based forecasting methods they deploy, which
leads to poor performance in attaining sales quota. In recent years’ industry surveys, we have seen that
just a little over 40% of forecasted opportunities actually close. Even when won, it’s not always the deal
originally forecasted. A company can’t generate predictable revenue when they miss their forecasts and
when more than half of reps don’t make their quota.
Sales forecasting is typically done using legacy, subjective sales forecasting methods based on sales reps’
gut instincts, not historical data. Thus, many companies don’t have a data-driven forecasting process,
relying instead on guesswork, which makes their forecasts less accurate and does not allow sales managers
to spot early signs of problems in the pipeline. Additionally many companies attempt to forecast within
their CRMs or with Excel spreadsheets; unfortunately neither resource is designed to create meaningful
and repeatable forecast processes. They are manual, unscalable and susceptible to errors. Sales managers
end up spending too much of their time on forecasting activities and pipeline management rather than
on more critical, value-add sales management tasks such as coaching, training and revenue-generating
activities.
What sales managers and VPs need is a system that encompasses the 8 Best Practices of Data-Driven Sales
Forecasting, which will be covered in detail in the coming sections:
1. Forecast by Pipeline Stages, not Forecast Stages
2. Separate Pipeline Management vs. Forecasting Meeting
3. Know The Company’s 4 Averages
4. Know Each Rep’s 4 Performance Areas
5. Inspect the 6 Essential Deal Metrics
6. Manage Your Forecast Killers
7. Look for Early Warning Signs

Barriers to Effective Sales Forecasting
Accurate sales forecasts are critical to managing your business effectively. They help sales teams achieve
their goals by identifying potential early warning signals and risks in the sales pipeline. Forecasting
facilitates business planning and risk management, along with budgeting and goal setting for the entire
company. There are many obstacles keeping organizations from successfully executing an accurate sales
forecast, including:

4

#1 Salesforce Analytics
• Using a Legacy Intuition-Based or “Finger in the Wind” Approach
• Insufficient Data, Inaccuracies and Guesswork in CRMs
• Using Manual, Unscalable and Error-Prone Spreadsheets
• Lack of Real-Time Data (Win/Loss, Sales Funnel, Sales Cycle)
• Sandbagging and “Happy Ears”
• Lack of Accountability in Relation to Individual Sales Rep Forecasts
• No Formal Coaching and Training in Sales Forecasting
However, there are many more reasons to align your sales team and processes with a data-driven
approach to forecasting. Overall, reducing risk and identifying opportunity, as discussed below, are two key
motivators for the bottom line of your business.

Managing Risk and Identifying Opportunity
Inaccurate sales forecasts carry tremendous risk. Without accurate forecasts, sales managers can expect a
big gap between forecasted deals and actual closed-won deals.
Do you know each of your sales rep’s historical forecasting error, or “Et = Yt – Ft”? Not knowing
this information further complicates your ability to make your forecasts more accurate over time.

Danger

Opportunity

Figure 1 - Risk
The Chinese characters for “Risk” suggest that risk is equal parts danger and opportunity, which is fitting
for sales forecasting. In terms of risk, for large public organizations, the danger can go as far as shareholder
lawsuits if company executives make public comments using incorrectly forecasted data. For smaller
organizations, incorrect forecasts can cause critical cash flow issues and a myriad of other nightmares for
everyone from Inside Sales Representatives to C-level Executives. But there is an immense opportunity
to improve your company’s sales growth, attain sales quota more effectively, and make better business
decisions from the improved visibility and planning of data-driven forecasting.
The opportunity to grow your company’s revenue, coupled with the risks your business takes from
performing subjective forecasts should make it clear that your business needs to start transitioning to datadriven forecasting; however, there are other more tangible reasons to implement a data-driven approach
with your sales team, reviewed below.

5

#1 Salesforce Analytics

Key Reasons to Use Data-Driven Sales Forecasting
What are the more immediate and tangible benefits of a data-driven sales forecast? Although reducing risk
and identifying opportunities in your data are the ultimate returns on investment, instituting a data-driven
approach to forecasting will help your company achieve the following:
• Better Accuracy
• More Effective Sales Reps
• More Objective Conversations About Performance
• Improved Conversion from Opportunities to Sales
• Faster Revenue Growth
• Better Business Decisions Based on Data
• More Executive Alignment from Better Visibility and Planning
Many sales organizations use Forecast Stages (i.e. Commit, Upside, Strong Upside, etc.) in sales forecasting.
Independent of the milestone hit by the opportunities, sales reps and managers are asked to make a
qualitative assessment of their opportunity. This is a “finger in the wind” approach that is based chiefly
on intuition. Ultimately, data-driven forecasts trump the legacy intuition-based forecasting approach for
the reasons above, discussed in more detail in the coming sections. Below are the steps you need to begin
forecasting based on data or by “Opportunity Stages” rather than by qualitative and legacy “Forecast
Stages”. Let’s get started.

6 Simple Steps to a Data-Driven Sales Forecast
Now that you are familiar with what data-driven forecasts can help you achieve, it is time to address the
real issue here: forecasting is hard. Really hard. It is a major test for understanding how your business
(micro and macro) works and running it effectively. It requires following processes, capturing data,
crunching numbers and coming to an internal agreement on what you are measuring.
If you are using a CRM like Salesforce.com, you probably have a pile of data in the form of old opportunities
and custom fields. You may have even changed your sales process multiple times along the way. This can
all make it tough to know where to start with respect to your Salesforce reporting, let alone your sales
forecast.
There are several steps you can take to get your sales process and sales forecasts to align more accurately;
however, you need to ensure that everyone on your team understands and buys into your new processes
and definitions in order to be truly effective. Here are the 6 steps to creating data-driven forecasts today:

6

#1 Salesforce Analytics

1. Standardize Your Opportunity Stages
In order to forecast more accurately, one of the first steps you should take is to define your opportunity
stages based on distinct steps that your buyer activetly takes in the sales process. Keep in mind, your stages
should be based on opportunity stages, not forecasting stages (commit, up-side), which are notoriously
subjective inputs.
First, start with a clearly defined sales process and formal definitions of each opportunity stage in the sales
funnel. The stage definitions must be driven by the buying process, not the sales process—even if the rep
is doing everything right, their steps do not reflect the customer's probability to buy. It is critical to define
and document your entire sales process to make sure that the sales team clearly understands qualification
rules, your sales system and the discrete stages through which an opportunity moves to close.

Opportunity Stage

Prospect Buying Action to Next Stage

Qualification

Agrees to a call with Sales Rep

Demo

Reviews demo and agrees to trial

Trial

Completes trial and requests quote

Negotiation

Reviews quote and responds with counter

A sales forecasting system based on opportunity stages, and the average conversions from one stage to the
next, is data-driven, objective and more accurate because it is based on conversion rates from analysis of
recent sales.
Opportunity stages should span the entire funnel from “New” to “Closed”. You should not have any
opportunities that are not in one of the stages, and stages must be distinct enough that you do not see
any two stages happening in conjunction; otherwise there is not enough differentiation between them
to be meaningful. Lastly you should be able to measure a gradual drop-off in conversion as opportunities
go through the funnel. Drastic drops or multiple “pass-through” stages should raise a red flag in your
opportunity stages, where the stages may not be defined properly.
By using opportunity stages, you will have the chance to measure what percent of opportunities make it to
Closed-Won based on historical data. Although this can be a challenge to do in Salesforce reporting or Excel
spreadsheets (hint: you can do this simply using InsightSquared), using quantitative stages makes it possible
for your Sales Ops team or Sales Analyst to measure your win rates objectively.

2. Know Historical Sales Stage Conversion Rates to Closed-Won
Knowing your historical sales stage conversion rates is critical in order to perform your forecasting
objectively. Data-driven forecasting takes historical data into consideration. In order to use historical data
to better forecast and improve win rates, you will need to be able to calculate historic win rate by stage,
historic win rate by employee and the estimated value of each opportunity. Calculate the value of those
opportunities and understand how the total value is changing month to month.

7

#1 Salesforce Analytics
Figure 2 below shows a sales funnel (by opportunity stage) and displays conversions from one stage to
the next. It allows the sales manager to understand nuances of the pipeline value, how it changes over
time, and the stage in which the dollars sit. Top sales managers will also know their historic win rates by
stage (conversion from that stage to Closed-Won), not just conversion rates from one stage to the next. For
example, in Figure 2 below, only 31% of all opportunities make it from Stage 1 to “Deal”, whereas 84% of
deals in Stage 4 will turn into deals for your organization. Looking at your historic sales funnel is a critical
first step to understanding how your team will perform in the short- and long-term and ultimately to
understanding how accurate your forecast will be.

Figure 2 – Opportunity Stage Conversions
With this information, you can quickly move from estimating which opportunities will close to more
accurately predicting how much each opportunity is worth based on size, rep, and stage. These historic win
rates allow you to estimate the value of a deal more realistically based on what has happened in the past.
Most importantly, using these win rates will help you identify bad opportunities that are currently
forecasted to close based on what you know about your stage, your rep, and the size of the deal. This way
you can eliminate them from your forecast to make it more honest and accurate.

3. Define Key Metrics that Drive Your Forecast and Meetings
The data-driven forecasting method looks at the conversion rates at each stage, and simply multiplies the
opportunity values by those rates. It is more mathematical, but doesn’t account for the nuances in your
pipeline. Your team should also consider your conversion rate from start to finish, or Opportunity: Deal
ratio, as well as the Essential Metrics for Data-Driven Forecasts, outlined shortly in this eBook.

8

#1 Salesforce Analytics

4. Demand Accurate Close Dates and Monitor Close Date Changes
Most CRMs have a “Close Date” field which allows your reps to enter their own prediction on when a deal
will close. Seek out examples where the close date doesn’t match the data (current stage + sales cycle from
that stage). Sit down and talk to your rep to find out what is happening. Even if your entire organization
loves numbers you can’t ignore all of the subjective data your sales rep gathers throughout their process.
Demand accurate, up-to-date data from your reps and hold them accountable for all of their opportunities.
All the forecasting tools in the world cannot help you forecast correctly if you have no data to analyze.

5. Know the Historical Accuracy of Your Team’s Forecasts
Past performance is a leading indicator for future performance. By knowing the historical accuracy and
performance of each of your sales reps, you will be able to guide and coach them to adjust their forecast
for improved accuracy based on the profile of deals they have in their pipeline and their historical data.

6. Separate Your Pipeline Review vs. Forecasting Meeting
Successful sales managers must differentiate between sales pipeline review meetings and sales forecasting
meetings. Though they are both meant as a way to monitor sales, key leading indicators, and strategy, they
should each have a distinct focus and objective.
Pipeline review meetings should happen every two weeks and a sales manager should go through the top
of the funnel to ensure that there are enough early stage opportunities for future success. Sales forecasting
meetings should happen every week, ideally on a Monday, and during this meeting a sales manager should
inspect each deal and help coach reps to the finish-line on later stage opportunities that are meant to close
in the current selling period.

How to Prepare for Your Weekly Forecasting Meeting
Schedule a Weekly Meeting with Your Sales Team
It’s important to have regular “Sales Forecasting” weekly meetings in order to accurately project deals
that will close in the current reporting period. These meetings are intended to make sure the data that
underlies your forecast is up to date and accurate. But the ultimate objective is to help coach and manage
your reps to succeed with achieving their quota.
Before starting any sales forecasting meeting, make sure you know:

9

#1 Salesforce Analytics

A) The Company’s 4 Averages
1. Average Sales Cycle (Winning)
2. Average Loss Cycle
3. Average Deal Size
4. Average Conversion Rate from each Stage to Closed-Won

B) Each Rep’s 4 Performance Areas
1. Pipeline: Open Pipeline, Closed-Won, Quota Gap
2. Deal Averages: Sales Cycle, Deal Size, Win/Loss Cycles for Key Stages
3. Sales Funnel: Historical Conversion Rate from Each Stage to Closed-Won
4. Deal Analysis: Historical Opportunity Diagnosis Accuracy

Essential Metrics for Data-Driven Forecasts
In order to get a complete view of your sales forecast you will need to also consider the following metrics in
your analysis:
1. Stage: Look at what stage your opportunity is currently in. Based on what we discussed above, by now
you should know which conversion rate to Closed-Won would apply at each stage and have a clear
idea of what the probability of converting the opportunity to a closed deal is at this stage. Watch for
negative velocity at later stages in your sales cycle, as this is an indicator that your deal could be at risk
(traditionally, deals speed up as they progress through the sales cycle).
2. Age: You probably have a number of stale opportunities that should have been purged from your pipeline.
If the opportunity is 2x or 3x longer than your typical average sales cycle, your opportunity is “at risk”.
Sales managers should know their sales cycle by Won/Loss and look at how long a successful opportunity
stays in each stage, and then compare that to their current open opportunities. If the successful
opportunities usually move through Stage 1 in only a few days and your current pipeline is averaging over
a month then that’s a clear sign that these stale opportunities should be purged. During your forecasting
meeting you can now have this objective conversation with your sales rep.
3. Size: Salespeople typically want to focus on big deals and have “happy ears” (reps hear only good news,
not listening objectively) but as a result, most organizations waste time on big opportunities that were
never realistic in the first place. Effective managers must review their won/loss analysis and then look
at win rates for the bigger opportunities. There is typically a sizeable gap between those two numbers,
which is why you should discuss these bigger forecasted opportunities at forecasting meetings and ask
each rep for more objective data about why they believe these will close when projected.
4. Engagement: Know if the opportunity has stalled in momentum by viewing activity on the opportunity
for the past 2 weeks (or 10 business days)—if there is no activity and it is forecasted to close this month,

10

#1 Salesforce Analytics
this is an indicator that the opportunity is at risk. If you have a traditionally longer sales cycle, adjust this
threshold based on your historical data, but continue to monitor for drops in engagement.
5. Effort: Know how much effort went into the opportunity—this can be measured by tracked activities
that your sales reps should be logging in your CRM. Additionally, you should apply some of the principles
of “activity based costing” and measure some of your activities as more impactful and effective than
others: thus a demo activity or a trial activity of your product would mean a lot more than just a cold call
activity. If a lot of effort or activity was invested into the opportunity then it’s more likely to close, but it is
important to monitor the “quality” or the type of activity and not just the “quantity”.
6. Slippage: When reviewing opportunities, if you are seeing deal slippage or the opportunity close date
getting pushed out a several times then the opportunity is at risk. Another “Forecast Killer”, slippage
should be a key indicator of stalling opportunities.

Overlay Your Data-Driven Forecast with
Your Rep’s Intuition
While we are espousing using a data-driven sales forecasting method to replace legacy forecasting
methods, a successful sales manager must still make sure to overlay the data-driven forecast with the
sales rep’s insights. Accurate forecasting demands that the two not be mutually exclusively, but rather
that companies start with data and then overlay it with their reps’ experience, insight and intuition (after
all, you pay them a lot of money to be experts at reading prospects and situations). Consider these key
concerns that every inside sales manager should address:
• Does your Sales Rep Have Proof of "BANT" with the Opportunity? (Budget, Authority, Need, Timeline)
• What competing products are being evaluated?
• Why is this opportunity in stage X and what would move it to the next stage?
• Why do you believe that this opportunity will ultimately close?
These questions will help you get the accurate forecast you need and better prepare you to meet with
management to address your sales forecast for the coming month or quarter.
Also, remember to look for early warning signs such as monthly progress vs. forecast projections, negative
velocity, and struggling reps to fill in the entire forecasting story.

11

#1 Salesforce Analytics

Manage Your 10 Forecast Killers
Consider these key factors that increase the risk for any forecast. Flag your opportunities as “at risk” if
they fall outside of the normal profile of the following:
• Timing: Time kills all deals. Look at the opportunity age vs. your average sales cycle (i.e. win cycle).
Also if the opportunity is sitting in first two stages longer your historical won cycles for those stages,
then they are “stuck opportunities” and should be flagged as at risk.
• Average Deal Size ($): Review the expected opportunity size vs. your average won deal size. If your
opportunity is 3x greater than your average, it should be treated differently than your regular
opportunities. Larger deals have lower close rates and longer sales cycles than smaller deals, so if
the sales rep is not treating the particular opportunity differently then it’s at risk. Also note if the
expected deal size of a given opportunity dropped by more than 30% in later stages then it may be
at risk.
• Slippage: Opportunities that are pushed often or slip beyond the expected close date should be
flagged as at risk. If a deal’s close date has pushed more than 3x then it should be flagged as at risk.
• Stalled Engagement: Opportunities that are forecasted to close soon should be actively engaged
with by reps. If an opportunity displays little to no rep activity over the past two weeks, it has likely
stalled, diminishing the chances that this deal will close so it should be flagged as at risk.

Figure 3 – Slippage and Opportunity Changes
• Stage: An opportunity in the first stage of the sales cycle does not belong in the sales forecast, even
if the rep marked the expected close date in the current selling period. Additionally, make sure that
for every opportunity (at any stage), your reps know clear next steps that the contact will take.
Otherwise, the opportunity must be flagged as at risk.
• Negative Velocity: If there is negative velocity (or deal is stalling for a longer period of time in
the last few stages) then it should also be flagged as a deal at risk.

12

#1 Salesforce Analytics
• Title: By the time the opportunity reaches the late stages, your reps should be talking to a contact
who has a title of your typical buyers. If your champion still has to ask for permission at this late
stage from others with authority at his company then the opportunity is at risk. If the rep is not
already talking to these other executive sponsors at this late stage then this opportunity must be
flagged as at risk.
• Lead Source: Figure out what your win rates are for each lead source. If an opportunity comes
from your low-probability source, it should be flagged as at risk.
• No competitor: Typically, customers will shop around to compare products and prices. If during
late stages in the buying process, your sales rep is not aware of which competitors his contact
has looked at, then that opportunity should be flagged at risk.
• Late Random Additions: Look closely at any large deals (that are more than 2x the average deal
size) that were randomly added at the last minute. These should be flagged as at risk.
Make sure to monitor these variables when judging your projected forecasts and analyze them in your
weekly meeting with your sales reps. You may find that opportunities that look like winnable deals at
face value could actually be at risk and in need of immediate attention. Ultimately, by planning your
sales stages, maintaining standards throughout your sales process, and measuring your projected
forecasts against your historic performance you will find that sales forecasting becomes a more
accurate, integral and dependable measurement of your sales performance, and that your organization
will prosper from your newfound processes and the integrity of your forecasting.

Conclusion
Like all sales managers, you need better sales forecasts to manage your team, plan and budget
more accurately, set more realistic expectations for your organization, and ultimately to help grow
revenue. It is also likely that you’ve spent countless hours in your CRM or Excel spreadsheets trying
to formulate an accurate, repeatable forecast that has continued to miss the mark, time and again.
This guide discussed the best practices of data-driven sales forecasting and the key reasons to use
data-driven sales forecasting with “opportunity stages” rather than the legacy approach using
“forecasting stages”. It also provided the simple steps to get started with a data-driven sales forecast
that will place you on the path to more accurate forecasts and increase your team’s performance
and productivity.
Below is a figure that shows a data-driven forecast —our Smart Forecast— in InsightSquared. If you
are interested in using predictive analytics and automating your forecast, request a free trial of the
Smart Forecast and other InsightSquared reports by reaching out via email or by clicking below.

13

REQUEST A FREE TRIAL >

About InsightSquared
InsightSquared provides disruptive and breakthrough sales and marketing analytics for Salesforce. The
analytics, dashboards and reports are built from the ground up for sales managers and business executives
who run small and midsize companies (SMBs). Our Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) product lives in the cloud,
meaning SMBs don’t need to license expensive software, invest in new hardware, or employ dedicated IT
and analytical staff to use it.

Contact Us
160 Sidney Street
Cambridge MA, 02139
(617) 370-8100
info@insightsquared.com

13

