Fundamental Principles of
Mechanical Design

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 1

References
• Precision Machine Design, A. Slocum, 1992.
• Exact Constraint Design: Machine Design Using Kinematic
Principles, D. Blanding, 1999.
• The Elements of Mechanical Design, J. Skakoon, 2008.
• Design Principles for Precision Mechanisms, H. Soemers, 2010.
• Mechanical Engineering Design, J. Shigley and C. Mischke, 5th
Edition, 1989.
• Detailed Mechanical Design: A Practical Guide, J. Skakoon, 2000.
• Fundamentals of Design, A. Slocum, 2007.
• Universal Principles of Design, W. Lidwell, K. Holden, & J. Butler,
2003.
• Mechatronics and Machine Design Notes, S. Awtar, U. Michigan.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 2

Introduction
• Precision machines are essential elements of an industrial
society.
• A precision machine is an integrated system that relies on
the attributes of one component to augment the
weaknesses of another component.
• Here we emphasize the design of mechanical and structural
precision machine components and their integration with
sensor, actuator, and control systems to maximize
performance.
• Design is a mixture of analysis and creative thought.
• Good designs are based on excellent concepts and properly
designed details.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 3

• Design engineers must be more creative than their
competition and more observant of the world around them.
• Analogous to physical exercise, analysis is a form of mental
exercise that trains the mind to be strong and swift. Many
designs would never have even been conceived of if the
design engineer did not understand the basic physics
behind the process or machine that prompted the need for a
new design.
• Design engineers must be good at identifying problems.
Once a problem is identified, it will usually yield to an
unending barrage of creative thought and analysis.
• In addition to identifying and solving problems, the design
engineer must also learn to identify what the customer really
needs, which is not necessarily what the customer thinks
that he or she needs.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 4

Fundamental Principles
• Understand them. Associate images with them.
• When you look at a machine or structure, try to see
the fundamental principles in either action or
missing.
• With a deep knowledge of these fundamental
principles, one can rapidly generate strategies and
concepts with the greatest viability.
• With a deep understanding of fundamental
principles, one can critically evaluate other
machines and components.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 5

• Occam’s Razor
– Keep things simple to start and add detail as the design
develops.
• Simplicity vs. Complexity
– Create designs that are explicitly simple. Keep
complexity intrinsic.
• Laws of Nature
– Fundamental Laws of Nature – the basics come before
the details!
– Newton’s Laws, Laws of Thermodynamics, Maxwell’s
Equations
• Saint-Venant’s Principle
– When an object is to be controlled, sketch it being held
at points several characteristic dimensions apart.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 6

• Golden Rectangle
– Don’t know what size it should be? Start with a ratio of
about 1.6:1.
• Independent Functions
• Keep the functions of a design independent from one
another.
• Abbe’s Principle
– Small angular deflections are amplified by distance to
create large linear displacements.
• Maxwell & Reciprocity
– Uncomfortable with a design? Try inverting it, or turning
it on its side.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 7

• Self-Principles
– Use an object’s geometry or other property to prevent a
problem.
• Stability
– Stable, neutrally stable, and unstable effects can help or
hurt. Some things can be made neutrally stable and
fast, while vibration can induce instability. Beware of
buckling of compression members.
• Symmetry
– Try a design that is symmetric, and then impose
reciprocity to consider a design that is not symmetric.
• Parallel Axis Theorem
– Add mass away from the neutral axis to increase
strength and stiffness.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 8

• Accuracy, Repeatability, and Resolution
– Make your machine repeatable first, then tune for
accuracy if you have fine enough resolution. Tell the
same story each time, the correct story, and with
enough detail so people can understand it.
• Sensitive Directions and Reference Features
– Why pay for performance in a direction that is not
needed? Establish reference datums from which you
measure critical parameters.
• Triangulate for Stiffness
– Triangulate parts and structures to make them stiffer.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 9

• Load Paths
– Plan the load paths in parts, structures, and assemblies.
– Draw a line through the path that forces follow, and seek
to minimize its length. If the path and shape changes
significantly as the machine moves, then the machine will
have limited accuracy and may have limited repeatability.
• Avoid Bending Stresses
– Prefer tension and compression.
• Manage Friction
– Avoid sliding friction. Use rolling element bearings.
• Free Body Diagrams & Superposition
– To analyze a complex object, separate it into parts and
label the forces and moments on each part that are
imposed by other parts.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 10

• Preload
– Loose fits between objects mean you cannot predict
where one object will be with respect to the other.
Apply loads between the objects as part of
manufacturing and assembly to take out the slack in
the system.
• Centers of Action
– If forces are applied through the centers of mass,
stiffness, and friction, there will be no moments and
hence minimal errors.
• Exact Constraint Design
– The number of points at which a body is held or
supported should be equal to the number of degrees
of freedom that are to be constrained.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 11

• Elastically Averaged Design
– Hold or support a body with ten times (or more)
compliant points than there are degrees of freedom to
be restrained, such that the errors in the compliant
support points will average out.
• Stick Figures
– Initially sketch an idea using simple stick figures,
which also denote where major coordinate systems
are located in the design. The coordinate systems
are to be used for modeling individual modules, e.g.,
for creating an error budget to predict a machine’s
repeatability and accuracy.

Let’s discuss these in more detail!
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 12

Occam’s Razor
• William of Occam (1284-1347) – English philosopher
and theologian
• “Plurality should not be assumed without necessity.”
• A problem should be stated in in its most basic and
simplest terms.
• The simplest theory that fits the facts of a problem is the
one that should be selected.
• Limit Analysis should be used to check ideas.
• Use fundamental principles as catalysts to help keep
things simple.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 13

• Complexity is to be minimized in both design and
manufacturing. A careful systems approach is required.
• Opportunities to Keep Things Simple
– Overall Design Strategy
– Design Concept
– Formation of Modules
• Modules have to be assembled and interfaced to
each other.
– Design and Selection of Components
• Detailed design gets done at the component level.
• Keep functional requirements of the design in
mind.
• Keep implied functional requirements of the
components in mind.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 14

– Goal is to minimize the number of components (which
may lead to the specification of a few highly complex
components) and balance component complexity with
the number and complexity of the manufacturing
processes and the quantity to be manufactured.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 15

Simplicity vs. Complexity
• Create designs that are explicitly simple. Keep
complexity intrinsic.
• What makes a design simple? Can your intuition alone
judge simplicity? Will you know it when you see it?
• The less thought and less knowledge a device requires
for production, testing, and use, the simpler it is.
• How much thought? How much knowledge? Judge best
by comparing one solution to another.
• Of course, it may take lots of thought and knowledge to
get to a design requiring little of either – that is design!

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 16

• What a simple design means is that everyone involved
with its production and use sees nothing that looks
complicated from his or her own perspective or
convention.
• Complexity is buried and invisible. There is a heirarchy
for knowledge and thought. Each hierarchical level may
be intrinsically complex, yet the device remains simple if
the complexity resides only within its own level.
– Screw threads have abundant scientific and
manufacturing complexity, yet that complexity is
invisible to the designer. We just say ¼ -20.
• Complex geometry no longer implies a complicated
design. A part’s geometry may be complicated, yet its
production and use may be no more difficult than for one
with much simpler geometry.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 17

• Simplicity can be subtle. Design symmetry into
components. If a part is asymmetric, knowledge and
thought are needed to orient it for either the assembly or
the use. Assembling or using symmetrical parts requires
less knowledge and thought than asymmetric parts.
• Simplicity can be paradoxical. Symmetry adds
information to the component part, thus adding cost to
manufacture, but makes the part simpler to use e.g., the
double-sided key.
• Two common techniques for keeping things simple by
keeping complexity hidden are:
– Purchasing rather than making components
– Specifying components by standards

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 18

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 19

Laws of Nature
• To develop a physical model of an existing system or of
a system concept, we use engineering judgment and
make simplifying assumptions.
• To develop a mathematical model, a model that can
predict system dynamic behavior, we apply the Laws of
Nature to the physical model.
• Drop a strong cylindrical magnet down a copper pipe
with plenty of clearance between the magnet and the
pipe wall. What happens? How many Laws of Nature
are illustrated?
– Newton’s 2nd Law, Newton’s Law of Gravitation,
Ampere’s Law, Faraday’s Law, Lenz’s Law
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 20

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 21

Saint-Venant’s Principle
• Saint-Venant was a strong proponent of coordinating
experimental and practical work with theoretical study. His
greatest contribution to engineering is his approach to
modeling practical problems.
• The principle says that several characteristic dimensions
away from an effect, the effect is essentially dissipated. Or if
an effect is to dominate a system, it must be applied over 3-5
characteristic dimensions of the system.
– Local effects of loading do not effect global strains.
– For example, the bending strains at the root of a cantilever
beam are not influenced by the local deformations of a
point load applied to the end of a cantilever beam.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 22

Saint-Venant’s Principle

≈3

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

φ

K. Craig 23

• The engineering applications of this observation are
profound for the development of conceptual ideas and initial
layouts of designs.
– To not feel something’s effects, be several characteristic
dimensions away.
– To dominate and control something, apply constraints
over several characteristic dimensions.
• Application of Saint-Venant’s Principle
– When mounting bearings to support a shaft, the bearings
should be spaced 3-5 shaft diameters apart if the
bearings are to effectively resist moments applied to the
shaft.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 24

– In machine tool structure, if one is to minimize
bending, the length of the structure should be no
more than 3-5 times the depth of the beam.
– When bolting components together, in order to make
the bolted joint act almost as it were welded together,
the bolts’ strain (stress) cones should overlap. The
strain cone emanates from 45° to 60° under the bolt
head. The strain cones typically overlap if the bolts
are spaced less than 3-5 bolt diameters apart.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 25

Golden Rectangle
• The Golden Rectangle, discovered by Pythagoras, is a
rectangle whose sides are in proportion such that when a
square is cut from the rectangle, the remaining rectangle
has the same proportions as the original rectangle, i.e., a/b
= 1.618

• If the pattern of subtracting squares continues and a spiral
curve is drawn by linking together circular arcs whose
centers are the corners of the squares, the spiral continues
to infinity.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 26

• The Golden Rectangle can help the engineer initially
sketch concepts that have a greater chance of being
realizable. When designing a machine, one can either:
– start from the outside and work inwards, which might
force the inner workings to be cramped and lead to
degradation of performance, or
– start from the inside with a critical module and design
outwards, which might result in a machine that is too
spacious.
• A compromise from the beginning can be achieved with
either method by initially sketching concepts while
keeping the proportions of the Golden Rectangle in
mind. Saint-Venant’s principle should also be
considered when laying out proportions and spacing of
machine elements.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 27

Independent Functions
• Keep the functions of a design independent from one
another.
• During the concept development stage of the design
process, you will decompose a device or system into
basic functions. Keep those functions separate!
• This is not as easy as it sounds. There will
be temptations to combine functions and
features and thus compromise the design.
Consider the ball-and-socket tripod
head for a camera. There is no
functional independence of positioning
and locking.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 28

This is an improvement in separating
functions. Here tightening the nut
creates no rotational friction between
nut and ball, but at a cost in
manufacturing.

Multi-axis pan head camera mount has
functional independence of all three
rotational locking and positioning
functions.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 29

• Accept that everything in design, including independence
of function, is a compromise. You need not take an
unyielding posture to any rule of design, but always
understand how and why you yield.
Seek independence of the
functions of a device, but
do not preclude combining
functions within parts.
Here, the handles are
used for two functions,
positioning and locking.
Combined adjustment and
locking functionality
reduces part count and
operates intuitively.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 30

Abbe’s Principle
• The amplification of angular motion to create large
translational motions is one of the foremost principles in
the design of precision and robust machines.
• The Abbe Principle (Dr. Ernst Abbe 1840-1905) resulted
from observations about measurement errors in the
manufacture of microscopes.
– If errors in parallax are to be avoided, then the
measuring system must be placed coaxially with the
axis along which the displacement is to be measured
on the workpiece.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 31

• When an angular error is amplified by a distance, e.g., to
create an error in a machine’s position, the strict
definition of the error is a sine or cosine error.

• The implications of this observation on the design of
instruments and machines are profound:
– Always try to place the measurement system as close
to the line of action (the process) as possible.
– Always try to place bearings and actuators as close to
the line of action (the process) as possible.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 32

• The philosophy of Abbe’s Principle also extends to other
types of measurements.
– When measuring temperature, it is important to place
the temperature sensor as close as possible to the
process to be measured.
– The idea is the same for pressure, flow, voltage,
current, etc.
– In each case, the farther away you are from the
process to be measured, the greater the chance for
errors to reduce the accuracy of the measurement.
• Note that a small angular deflection in one part of a
machine quickly grows as subsequent layers of a
machine are stacked upon it.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 33

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 34

Maxwell & Reciprocity
• James Clerk Maxwell’s (1831-1879) theory of reciprocity
is commonly applied to mechanics and precision
measurement systems, and philosophically to how
difficult problems can be creatively solved.
• Let A and B be any two points of an elastic system. Let
the displacement of point B in any direction U due to a
force P acting in any direction V at A be u. Let the
displacement of A in the direction of V due to a force Q in
the direction U at B be v. Then Pv = Qu.
Reversal
Critical Thinking

1
= opportunity
problem

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 35

Self Principles
• Self principles utilize the phenomena the machine is trying
to control to help control the phenomena.
• There are four basic types of self principles: self-help, selfbalancing, self-protecting, and self-checking.
• Self-Help Systems
– Self-help systems use the phenomena to be controlled
as a means for controlling the phenomena. For example,
some airplane door mechanisms swing the door out
when opened, yet the door acts as a self-sealing tapered
plug when closed. The modern tubeless tire is a result of
careful structural design that utilizes the elastic nature of
the tire to make a seal that allows the tire to be inflated.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 36

– Forces applied to a structure or mechanism are used
to great advantage when they:
• Create new, useful forces
• Transform or redirect themselves
• Balance either themselves or existing loads
• Help to distribute loads
– Self-help that Creates Forces
• Pressure-formed seals such as O-rings and
internally-mounted doors use self-help to create
robust seals.
• The capstan and windlass use self-help to pull in
boat anchors by creating and multiplying friction
through several turns of chain.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 37

– Self-help that Redirects Forces
• Left-handed scissors have little to do with how
thumb and fingers fit, and lots to do with how hand
action naturally forces the blades’ cutting edges
together.
• Left- and right-handed scissors are mirror images
of each other, improving the scissors’ shearing
action for either user.

Self-Help in Scissors

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 38

– Self-help that Balances Forces
• Self-help can balance or neutralize, at least
partially, an undesirable effect, e.g.,
counterweights on draw and lift bridges and in
cable-operated elevators.
A balanced door with an articulated
hinge exhibits self-help. Wind will
not open this door, yet it opens and
closes easily in strong winds.
The hinge point, rather than being at
an outer edge, is inboard when the
door is closed. Wind pressure on the
door face is balanced on either side
of the hinge axis. As the door opens,
the pivot axis slides by mechanical
action to the side to open the door
fully.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 39

– Self-help that Distributes Loads
• In this case, the load path changes with
deformation, thereby improving performance.
• In Hertzian contact stress, the larger the load, the
larger the contact area.

• Structures can also be designed to stiffen or
strengthen with deflection. For example, beams
become much stiffer with large deflections (if they
don’t yield) as the bending progresses to tension.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 40

• Self-Balancing Systems
– Self-balancing systems utilize geometry to reduce an
undesirable effect such as high stress.
– An example of this is the leaning of turbine blades.
As the turbine spins, the shape of the blade pumps air
through the turbine and creates large bending
stresses on the blade. If the blade is tilted so that its
length axis is not along a radius of the turbine,
centrifugal forces can be used to create a bending
moment opposite to that caused by the airflow. In this
manner, cyclic tensile stresses can be minimized.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 41

• Self-Protecting Systems
– Self-protecting systems utilize passive elements to
ensure that the system is not overloaded to the point
of permanent deformation. They do this by providing
additional force transmission paths after a
predetermined elastic deformation occurs.
– However, in protecting one component the design
engineer must make sure that the effect does not
ripple through the system and damage other
components.
– Usually, self-protected systems can return to their
normal operating range unaffected by overloads.
– The most common example of self-protecting systems
are found in spring-actuated mechanisms.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 42

• Self-Checking Systems
– Self-checking systems utilize the concept of symmetry
to ensure geometric accuracy. This involves turning
the device through 180° and comparing the
measurements to the first set.
– For example, if a coordinate measuring machine
(CMM) is very repeatable but not accurate, it can still
be used to measure the straightness of a
straightedge. The edge of the straightedge is placed
vertical so that gravity does not create an error. The
straightedge is measured with the CMM and then the
straightedge is rotated 180° and measured again.
The measurements are subtracted from each other,
which cancels out the straightness error in the CMM.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 43

Stability
• Stability is of utmost importance in the design of structures,
actuators, bearings, and control systems.
• All systems are either stable, marginally stable, or unstable.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 44

Symmetry
• Can symmetry help or hurt a design?
• In general, symmetry is a good thing in a system, and thus a
good starting point in a design.
• Symmetry is a principle that is closely related to stability.
Symmetry can sometimes provide stability, sometimes not.
• In structures, symmetry may exist on an overall scale, such
as between two sides of a machine, but within each side of
the machine, symmetry takes second place to the desired
formation of triangles so as to make a system well-braced
and resistant to shearing.
• Structures are often symmetric to take loads from either side.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 45

• In bearings, it is often the opposite, where on an overall
scale one side of the system has bearings configured
and mounted to restrain five degrees of freedom of a
shaft, and at the other end of the shaft, the bearings only
prevent radial motion of the shaft.
• List what is symmetric and what is not symmetric about
each potential concept. Ask if symmetry helps or hurts.
Study what would happen if what was symmetric was
made non symmetric, and vice versa.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 46

Parallel Axis Theorem
• The Parallel Axis Theorem is a very powerful tool for
calculating the area moments of inertia for complex
objects.
– Starting with basic shapes, whose areas and area
moments of inertia about their local neutral axes are
known, a design engineer first finds the location of the
neutral axis of the composite structure, and then uses
the parallel axis theorem to determine the area
moment of inertia for the composite structure.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 47

Accuracy, Precision, & Resolution
• A good machine designer understands and has
developed an intuitive feeling for the factors that affect
machine performance. Equally important, the design
engineer must also understand the basic physics that
characterize a machine component or system. This
knowledge is essential for the development of good
designs and the proper selection of components.
• The design of quality precision machines depends
primarily on the ability of the design and manufacturing
engineers to predict how the machine will perform before
it is built.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 48

• The most important factors affecting the quality of a
machine are the accuracy, precision (repeatability), and
resolution of its components and the manner in which they
are combined. These factors are critical because they
affect every one of the parts that will be manufactured
using the machine.
• Minimizing machine cost and maximizing machine quality
mandate predictability of accuracy, repeatability, and
resolution. This allows the design engineer to optimize the
choice of components and to specify manufacturing
tolerances.
• Designing a machine that has good accuracy, repeatability,
and resolution is not a black art. It appears to be a black
art only when the observer lacks the time or resources to
use scientific principles to discover the true nature of the
phenomena.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 49

• In the context of taking a deterministic approach to
design, it is very important to understand the rules of the
game. There are three basic definitions to remember
with respect to how well a machine tool can position its
axes: accuracy, precision (repeatability), and resolution.
• The diagram on the next slide represents these
concepts.

• Accuracy is the ability to tell the truth.
• Precision is the ability to tell the same
story over and over again.
• Resolution is how detailed your story is.
• These three concepts are often improperly used, so
let’s discuss them.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 50

Accuracy, Precision (repeatability), and Resolution

Marksman’s Target
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 51

• Accuracy is the ability of system to tell the truth.
– Accuracy is a measure of how well a system can
achieve or measure a state that is traceable to a
national or international standard.
– If one were to use a device to make multiple
measurements of a known standard, the difference
between the known measurement and the average of
all measurements taken is the accuracy of the
measurement.
– Accuracy is the maximum translational or rotational
error between any two points in the machine’s work
volume.
– Accuracy can be represented as the difference
between the root mean square radius of all the bullet
holes in a target and the radius of the bull’s eye.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 52

– Linear, planar, and volumetric accuracy can all be
similarly defined for a machine.
– Accuracy is affected by the shape and size of
components, as well as thermal growth, backlash,
wear, friction, deformations, and sensor and control
system accuracy.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 53

• Repeatability (precision) is the ability to tell the
same story over and over again.
– Repeatability tells how well a system can achieve or
measure the same state each time.
– Repeatability is the error between a number of successive
attempts to move the machine to the same position.
– If one were to use a device and make multiple
measurements of a known standard, the standard
deviation of the measurements would be the repeatability
of the measurement, and the number of standard
deviations would give a confidence level about the
repeatability.
– Repeatability is affected by thermal growth, backlash,
wear, friction, deformations, and sensor and control
system repeatability.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 54

– Repeatability can be represented by the diameter of
the circle which contains N% of the bullet holes in the
target.
– Bidirectional repeatability is the repeatability achieved
when the point is approached from two different
directions.
– For a set of N data points with a normal (Gaussian)
distribution the mean xmean and standard deviation σ
are defined as:

1 N
1 N
2
x mean
xi
=
=
σ
( x i − x mean )
∑
∑
N i 1=
N −1 i 1
=
– The standard deviation is used in the determination of
the probability of occurrence of an event in a system
that has a normal distribution.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 55

– The percent chance of a value
occurring within a number of
standard deviations k of its
expected value is given in the table.
– The probabilistic approach to a
problem is only a tool to allow us to
deal with variables that are too
numerous or expensive to sort out
properly by common sense and
good metrology. Required use of
this tool might be an indication that
it is time to take a closer look at the
system and see if the system can
be changed to make it deterministic
and therefore more controllable.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

k
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0

N%
68.2689
95.4500
99.7300
99.9937
99.9999
100.0000

K. Craig 56

– Often the key to repeatability is not within the
machine itself, but in isolating the machine from
variations in the environment.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 57

• Resolution is how detailed your story is.
– Resolution is the ability of a system to tell the fine details
of the story or what is the minimum increment that can be
detected or moved.
– If one were to try and move to a desired position, and
then measure the error, and then correct the position by
the smallest achievable amount, it would be limited by the
resolution of the system.
– Resolution is the larger of the smallest programmable
step or the smallest mechanical step the machine can
make during point-to-point motion.
– Resolution is important because it gives a lower bound on
the repeatability that one could obtain if one really tried.
– Resolution is affected by friction and also the resolution of
the measurement and control system.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 58

• General Comments
– Of primary concern is the certainty of the
measurements themselves used to characterize the
accuracy, precision, and resolution of a machine, and
what parameters these measurements themselves
are functions of.
– Classify each of the motions your concepts require in
terms of the required accuracy, repeatability, and
resolution.
– How can the concepts be optimized to minimize
required accuracy and instead rely more on
repeatability?
– Can you minimize friction so as to likely increase
resolution?
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 59

• Accuracy, Repeatability, & Resolution Mapping
– Mapping is the ability to measure or predict the
repeatability or accuracy of a machine, and then use
this knowledge of the error to compensate for it.
– Thus, repeatability can sometimes substitute for
accuracy. In the static sense, this means that if parts
cannot be machined accurate enough to ensure that
their assembly has the desired accuracy, then
assemble them into the machine and then map the
machine’s performance. The machine’s control
system can use the map to compensate for the errors.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 60

Sensitive Directions
• Always identify the directions in which accuracy and
repeatability are most important. These are the sensitive
directions in a machine.
• In addition to the sensitive directions, there are also key
features (real or virtual), which will not change even
though many other features in the design change as it
evolves.
• Put a lot of effort into accuracy for the directions in which
you need it. Always be careful to think about where you
need precision.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 61

Triangulate for Stiffness
• Triangulate parts and structures to make them stiffer.
• Triangulation applies to structures and structural
elements. When components or structures need to be
stiff, create triangles.
Consider a swinging fence gate.
Triangulating members prevent, or
correct, sagging. A tensile cable
connects the lower outer corner to
the upper inner corner, and
transmits load to the gatepost.
Alternately, a compression brace
can be added to the diagonal to
transmit the load to the gatepost.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 62

• Ribs are common in molded and cast parts. They
efficiently stiffen the structure by using thin braces ,
which are required by many manufacturing processes.
Triangulating ribs in a molded part

• The three-dimensional equivalent of a triangle is a
tetrahedron. Four triangles give three-dimensional
rigidity.
A tetrahedron:
three-dimensional
triangulation
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 63

• Elements that triangulate are webs, truss members, ribs,
and flanges. All are tensile or compressive load-carrying
members in the plane of deflection.
• To triangulate, first identify the plane in which the load
and the undesirable stress or deflection lie, then add
integrally attached ribs, webs, flanges, or truss elements
in that plane.
• But beware! Stiffer does not always mean stronger or
more robust. Stiffening transfers loads to a different
place, a place that might be weaker or more susceptible
to fracture, fatigue, corrosion, or whatever else leads to
failure.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 64

Triangulate for Stiffness

Ribbed holes maintain strength, while
providing uniform wall thickness
=> less cycle time + material, fewer defective
parts during manufacturing

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 65

Load Paths
• Plan the load paths in parts, structures, and assemblies.
• Whenever you design a part or assembly, you should
clearly define the paths of applied and internal loads.
• You want the load path to be:
– Short
– Direct
– In a line or, barring that, in a plane
– Symmetric
– Non-redundant, or, barring that, elastic
– Locally closed
– Easily analyzed
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 66

• The first step in planning the load path is visualizing it.
Load paths through a pinned
clevis connection

In the pull-lever style, load
transfers through a lever stop,
the housing, a wall plate, screws,
wall anchors, and the wall. The
push-type dispenser transfers
the load more directly to the
wall and over a large area, a
much better load path.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

Wall-mounted liquid soap dispensers
K. Craig 67

• Locally-closed paths are especially preferred. Usercentered design benefits from locally-closed load paths.
Always consider how user-generated forces are
opposed.
Bicycle hand brakes are a common
example. A bicycle handbrake is
squeezed rather than pulled or
pushed. The load path is locally
closed. Pulling, rather than
squeezing the brake lever, would
give a load path through the rider’s
arm and body, to the seat, through
the frame, and, finally, to the
handlebar. This load path is
unstable and perilous.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 68

Avoid Bending Stresses
• Avoid bending stresses. Prefer tension and compression.
• As we have seen, triangulating members typically have
tension and compression loads rather than bending loads.
Bending produces stress
distributions that vary from zero
to some maximum.

Pure tension or compressive
members have constant stress
throughout.
All material
contributes
to carry
load.

Material is unstressed and contributes nothing to rigidity
or strength.
K. Craig 69
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

Shear stress distributions in
solid and hollow torsion shafts
are shown. Material near the
center of a solid shaft carries
no load. Material in a thin,
hollow shaft has nearly constant
shear.

• In bending and torsion, much of the material contributes
nothing to carrying load. The highly stressed areas fail
even while the neutral axis material remains unloaded.
Clearly, bending and torsion loads are inefficiently born
by structural elements, whereas uniformly-loaded
elements use material quite efficiently.

• Design to get uniform stress.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 70

• I-beams are a practical way to use material efficiently to
support bending deflections. Most of the material is at
the maximum possible distance from the centroid. Thus,
the material in an I-beam is nearly uniformly loaded, and
at the maximum stress.
• Also note that the vertical portion of an I-beam is a
triangulating shear web.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 71

• Of course, you will sometimes want to take advantage of
bending and non-uniform torsion.
• For example, torsional springs are cantilever beams
loaded in bending.
• Consider snap-fit features; these are cantilever beams
loaded in bending.
So an advantage of
non-uniform stress
is flexibility.
Any time you seek flexibility in
a part or structure, bending or
non-uniform torsional loads are
the better answer.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

Cantilever Snap-Fit

K. Craig 72

Manage Friction
• Manage friction in mechanisms.
• The only thing certain about friction in mechanical design is
that you will have it. How much, and its consequences, are
uncertain.
• Never trust friction – manage it.
• Avoid Sliding Friction
– Designers avoid sliding friction whenever possible.
– Managing sliding friction is difficult: stick-slip behavior
owing to the difference between static and dynamic
friction, wide variation in friction coefficients, uncontrolled
lubrication status, variable surface finishes, surface
damage, and wear.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 73

– If you do select sliding elements, select suitable
materials, carefully design the guiding system, test
beyond reason, and expect the worst.
• Maximize the Length of Linearly-Guided Components
– Linearly-guided components jam when the insertion
force is inadequate to overcome the friction of the
guides’ contacts.
Short, wide systems are
especially susceptible not
only because of the
length-to-width ratio, but
because the insertion
force is too easily applied
off center.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

Short, wide
sticky drawer

K. Craig 74

– A good minimum rule-of-thumb for length-to-width and
for length-to-load arm is 1.5 to 1. And your design
must guarantee contact only at the ends and not in
the middle of the moving component.
– Also note that linear systems rigidly guided on two
separate axes are over-constrained. These will jam
and stick and wear out and be difficult to manufacture.

Eliminate the fixed centerto-center distance in either
the carriage or the rails, or
expect trouble.

Over-constrained
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 75

• Select Rotary Motion over Linear Motion
– The journal bearing is why rotary motion is so much
better than linear motion.
W = load
The moment
M to turn the
axle is given
by: M = R × r × sin φ = F × r
While φ is governed
by the coefficient of
friction and the use of
lubricants, to reduce
friction, use small
diameter axles.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

axle
journal
bearing

K. Craig 76

– Consider the caged roller bearing. Roller and ball
bearings have advantageous rolling friction rather
than sliding friction (unless the rollers or balls touch
each other). A cage separates the rolling elements in
modern bearings.

Rotational sliding friction
between cage and roller is
still unavoidable, but the
miniature axles on the rollers
manage friction by using the
power of small radius.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 77

– Rotary motion is a much better selection over linear
motion in mechanical design. Linear motion works
with proper guiding and with good linear bearings.
Also you need space, and lots of it, for linear
guidance.
– Rotating bearings, of whatever form, offer stable,
compact guidance to the moving components of a
mechanism in a minimum space.
Plunger-style vs. lever-style
soap dispenser. The leverstyle has a natural
advantage for managing
friction.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 78

• Use Rolling Element Bearings Whenever Possible.
– A reliable way to manage friction is to use rolling
element bearings. Rolling elements also often
eliminate wear.
– A great advantage of rolling element bearings is that
they help to keep it simple. The complexity of ball
bearings is intrinsic and doesn’t normally concern
engineers.
– However, with bearings you are walking a tightrope
above over-constraint. Simple ball bearings have the
inherent advantage of small rotational degrees of
freedom to accommodate some misalignment.
Beyond that, keep a watchful eye out for overconstraint and mitigate with self-aligning and
adjustable features.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 79

• Use Flexures to Eliminate Friction.
– For a completely frictionless system, you cannot do
better than flexures.
– They are uncommon and are typically reserved for
precision instruments.
– Nevertheless, consider using flexures for precise,
frictionless motion over a limited deflection.
– The lack of friction means that flexure-defined motion
is predictable and reliable.
Triple spiral frictionless
flexure for guiding axial
displacement

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 80

Preload
• Components that move relative to one another generally
have tolerances that leave clearances between their mating
features. These clearances result in backlash which is
difficult to control.
• There are two strategies that can be used to limit or prevent
backlash.
– Increase the accuracy of components and decrease
clearances. This can increase system accuracy, but will
increase cost and can decrease system robustness.
– Preload components against each other. This is not
difficult to accomplish, increases system reliability, and is
very robust.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 81

• Preload involves using a spring, or compliance in the
mechanism itself, to force components together so there is
no clearance between elements.
• However, the compliance in the preload method itself must
be chosen such that it locally can deform to accommodate
component errors without causing large increases in the
forces between components.
• The challenge to the design engineer is to develop clever
methods of creating a compliant member which deforms
when subject to local distortions while not introducing
undesirable deflections in other directions.
• Also, to reduce the variation in the preload force on the
system, the amount of deflection used to create the
preload by compressing the compliant element should be
substantially larger than any expected local deformation.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 82

Centers of Action
• Minimizing moments on a system minimizes angular
motion, which minimizes sine errors and thus has the
potential to enhance the robustness of a design.
• Centers of Action are virtual points within a body such
that forces applied through these points generate no
moments on the body.
– Center of Mass
– Center of Stiffness
– Center of Friction
– Center of Thermal Expansion
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 83

Exact Constraint Design
• Use exact constraint when designing structures and
mechanisms – never over-constrain a design.
• If you rigidly constrain a component at more places than
are needed, you will start a fight between these places.
This is over-constraint.
• Exactly constrained designs are statically determinate,
whereas over-constrained or under-constrained designs
are statically indeterminate.
• Exact constraint means applying just enough constraints
to define a position or motion – no more, no less.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 84

• Three bearings on one shaft do not work. It is not luck you
need in trying to fit the shaft through three bearings, it’s
sympathy – it won’t go!
3 bearings on one shaft:
an over-constrained design

• Strictly speaking, even two rigidly-fixed ball bearings on
one shaft is an over-constraint if the shaft cannot slide
axially in one or the other inner races.
• Advantages of exactly constrained designs compared to
over-constrained designs are: no binding, no play,
repeatable position, no internal stress, lose-tolerance parts,
easy assembly, and robustness to wear and environment.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 85

• Basic Theory of Exact Constraint
– A three-dimensional object has 6 degrees of freedom: 3
translations and 3 rotations. Selectively constrain these
degrees of freedom to obtain the desired motion or
structure.
– The degrees of freedom is the number of independent
coordinates needed to completely specify the motion of
a mechanical system. This depends on the system itself
and is independent of the coordinate system chosen.

Six degrees of freedom

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 86

• A common example for illustrating exact constraint is a
kinematic connection which clearly shows all six
constraints.
The first three constraints
come from sphere 1 contacting
three surfaces in a trihedral
receptacle. These are the three
translation constraints. The Vshaped groove with sphere 2
supplies two rotational
constraints, and the plate
surface with sphere 3, the final.
You also need a nesting force,
the plate’s weight, for example.
Remove the plate and it returns
to the base in exactly the same
position. No precision
dimensions are required.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

A kinematic connection:
perfect 3D constraint
K. Craig 87

• Precision (of position), also called repeatability, is the
degree to which a part, or feature on a part, will return to
exactly the same position time after time. When a machine
is designed so that its parts are exactly constrained,
extraordinary precision is automatically obtained.
• Accuracy (of position) is the degree to which the location of
a part or feature exactly coincides with its desired or
intended location.
• In general, precision is achievable without accuracy, but
accuracy is not achievable without precision. By designing
exactly constrained connections, we can achieve highprecision machines using ordinary low-cost, inaccurate
parts. Then, through the use of adjustments or fixturing
techniques, accuracy can be achieved.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 88

• Exact Constraint in Two Dimensions
– Exact constraint is easier to picture in two dimensions
than three. The principles are the same, but in two
dimensions there are three degrees of freedom: two
translation and one rotation.
– A constraint is a point of contact maintained by a
nesting force wherein the nesting force vector goes
through the contact point normal to the surface of
contact.
one constraint:
x motion

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 89

– Two posts can be used to constrain against
translation in two dimensions or rotation and one
translation.

two constraints:
x motion and rotation

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

two constraints:
x motion and y motion

K. Craig 90

– Add a third post, and the plate has a single,
unambiguous position in 2D space. The nesting
force, of course, has to be able to resist any applied
forces.
plate fully constrained
in two dimensions

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 91

Two-dimensional constraint condition examples
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 92

• Nesting Forces
– You cannot just replace the nesting force with a fourth
post. Dimensions are never perfect, and the post
either interferes with or does not touch the plate.
– Nesting forces (one for each contact point) can be
combined vectorially into a single force.
– In practice, nesting forces are created, for example,
by weight, cams, wedges, springs, and screws, and
counteract externally applied loads.
A fourth post is overconstrained
and does not replace the
nesting force.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 93

– There is a nesting force “window” outside of which
any nesting force will tumble the component out of the
stable, nested position.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 94

• Constraint Theory in Practice
– If materials were inelastic and unyielding, and,
therefore, components neither deformed nor failed,
we could design everything with perfect exact
constraint. But they are not, so we compromise.
– Never over-constrain a design, unless you know how.
– Two examples are curvature matching and elastic
constraint design.
The trihedron receptacle exactly
constrains three translations, but creates
infinite stresses at points of contact.
Instead, use a conical hole for circle
contact to better distribute the load and
for ease of machining. Curvature or
surface matching compromises exact
constraint, but improves load-carrying.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 95

– To use elastic constraint, combine a flexing feature
with the proper nesting forces, and the redundant
constraint then also contacts its mating surface.
– If you must overconstrain a design to increase loadcarrying or improve stability, you must mitigate that
over-constraint with elastic deformation.
– Increase rigidity by adding flexibility? What? But you
apply the flexibility only in the direction needed to take
up variations such as manufacturing tolerances.
Office chairs never have just three
casters. Recent popular designs have
five which adds stability and makes
them safe to lean back in. Despite the
pedestal arrangement, the feet flex
enough for all five to contact the
floor.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 96

– Combine surface matching and elastic constraint
design and you get a bolted flange joint, which is a
frictional constraint.
– Large clearance holes avoid obvious over-constraint,
even with multiple bolts, and manufacturing the two
flat surfaces to adequate accuracy is not difficult. The
bolts easily draw in any inaccuracy.

Flanged joint: an elastic, surfacematching, frictional constraint

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 97

• Real-World Example
– Linear drives for scanning often consist of a motor attached to a
leadscrew, which in turn drives the scanning carriage. The first
design (figure, left) showed a cyclic error in the linear motion.
More accurate machining, better part alignment, and a more
expensive leadscrew were all tried with no success. A constraint
analysis then showed that the design was over-constrained. With
the motor rigidly attached to the leadscrew, the motor requires only
a single constraint, i.e., prevent rotation of its housing. The
compound flexure (figure, right) eliminated the problem; the
expensive leadscrew, accurate machining, and assembly steps
were unnecessary.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 98

Elastically Averaged Design
• Controlled Compliance can make an over-constrained
four- or five-legged chair not wobble. Elastic deformation
compensates for geometric errors. However, the forces
are managed so yielding does not occur.
• When there are many compliant elements, each of which
locally deforms to accommodate an error, in total they can
form a very rigid and accurate system.
The red arrow shows the minimum
radius from the chair center of
stiffness to the edge of the supports
for stability – the chair will tip if the
CG shifts outside this radius. All the
legs have to be compliant.
Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 99

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 100

Exact Constraint Design
dictates the use of only
two balls between the
Inner Race and Outer Race
to constrain the two inplane translations.
Elastic Averaging enables
the use of multiple balls,
thus greatly improving load
bearing characteristics.
This places greater
emphasis on manufacturing
uniformity.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 101

Gears, bearings,
screws, flexures all
make use of elastic
averaging.

Mechanical Design Fundamentals

K. Craig 102

